IN OUR TIME
Everybody was drunk. The whole battery was drunk going along
the
road in the dark. We were going
to the Champagne. The lieutenant
kept riding his horse out into thefields and saying
to him, Tm drunk, I
tellyou, mon vioux. Oh, I am so soused'. We went along
the road all
night in the dark and the adjutant kept riding up alongside my kitchen
and saying,
'
You mustput
it out. It is dangerous.
It will be observed* . We werefifty kilometresfrom thefront
but the adjutant worried about
thefire in my kitchen. It wasfunny going along
that road. That was
when I was a kitchen corporal.
INDIAN CAMP
AT the lake shore there was another rowboat drawn up. The
two Indians stood waiting.
Nick and his father got in the stern of the boat and the
Indians shoved it off and one of them got
in to row. Uncle
George sat in the stern of the camp rowboat. The young
Indian shoved the camp boat off and got
in to row Uncle
George.
The two boats started off in the dark. Nick heard the oarlocks of the other boat quite a way ahead of them in the mist.
The Indians rowed with quick choppy strokes. Nick lay back
with his father's arm around him. It was cold on the water.
The Indian who was rowing them was working very hard,
but the other boat moved farther ahead in the mist all
the time.
'Where are we going. Dad?' Nick asked.
'Over to the Indian camp. There is an Indian lady very
sick.'
'Oh/ said Nick.
Across the bay they found the other boat beached. Uncle
George was smoking a cigar
in the dark. The young Indian
95
96 INDIAN CAMP
pulled the boat way up on the beach. Uncle George gave
both the Indians cigars.
They walked up from the beach through
a meadow that
was soaking wet with dew, following the young Indian who
carried a lantern. Then they went into the woods and followed a trail that led to the logging road that ran back into
the hills. It was much lighter on the logging road as the
timber was cut away on both sides. The young Indian
stopped and blew out his lantern and they all walked on
along the road.
They came around a bend and a dog came out barking.
Ahead were the lights of the shanties where the Indian barkpeelers lived. More dogs rushed out at them. The two
Indians sent them back to the shanties. In the shanty nearest
the road there was a light in the window. An old woman
stood in the doorway holding a lamp.
Inside on a wooden bunk lay a young Indian woman. She
had been trying to have her baby for two days. All the old
women in the camp had been helping
her. The men had
moved off up the road to sit in the dark and smoke out of
range of the noise she made. She screamed just
as Nick and
the two Indians followed his father and Uncle George into
the shanty. She lay
in the lower bunk, very big under a
quilt. Her head was turned to one side. In the upper bunk
was her husband. He had cut his foot very badly with an
axe three days before. He was smoking a pipe. The room
smelled very bad.
Nick's father ordered some water to be put on the stove,
and while it was heating he spoke
to Nick.
'This lady is going to have a baby, Nick,' he said.
'I know,
5
said Nick.
'You don't know,' said his father. 'Listen to me. What she
is going through is called being in labour. The baby wants
to be born and she wants it to be born. All her muscles are
trying to get the baby born. That is what is happening when
she screams.'
INDIAN CAMP 97
'I see,' Nick said.
Just then the woman cried out.
'Oh, Daddy, can't you give her something to make her
stop screaming?' asked Nick.
.
'No. I haven't any anaesthetic,' his father said. 'But her
screams are not important.
I don't hear them because they
are not important.'
The husband in the upper bunk rolled over against the wall.
The woman in the kitchen motioned to the doctor that the
water was hot. Nick's father went into the kitchen and
poured about half of the water out of the big
kettle into a
basin. Into the water left in the kettle he put
several things
he unwrapped from a handkerchief.
'Those must boil,' he said, and began to scrub his hands in
the basin of hot water with a cake of soap he had brought
from the camp. Nick watched his father's hands scrubbing
each other with the soap. While his father washed his hands
very carefully and thoroughly, he talked.
'You see, Nick, babies are supposed to be born head first,
but sometimes they're not. When they're not they make a
lot of trouble for everybody. Maybe I'll have to operate on
this lady. We'll know in a little while.'
When he was satisfied with his hands he went in and went
to work.
'Pull back that quilt, will you, George?' he said. 'I'd
rather not touch it.'
Later when he started to operate Uncle George and three
Indian men held the woman still. She bit Uncle George on
the arm and Uncle George said, 'Damn squaw bitch!' and
the young Indian who had rowed Uncle George over laughed
at him. Nick held the basin for his father. It all took a long
time.
His father picked
the baby up and slapped
it to make it
breathe and handed it to the old woman.
'See, it's a boy, Nick,' he said. 'How do you like being an
interne?'
98 INDIAN CAMP
Nick said, 'All right'. He was looking away so as not to
see what his father was doing.
'There. That gets it,' said his father and put something
ijito the basin.
Nick cjidn't look at it.
'Now,' his father said, 'there's some stitches to put
in. You
can watch this or not, Nick, just
as you like. I'm going to
sew up the incision I made.'
Nick did not watch. His curiosity had been gone for a long
time.
His father finished and stood up. Uncle George and the three
Indian men stood up. Nick put
the basin out in the kitchen.
Uncle George looked at his arm. The young Indian smiled
reminiscently.
Til put some peroxide on that, George,' the doctor said.
He bent over the Indian woman. She was quiet now and
her eyes were closed. She looked very pale. She did not
know what had become of the baby or anything.
Til be back in the morning,' the doctor said, standing up.
'The nurse should be here from St. Ignace by noon and she'll
bring everything we need.'
He was feeling exalted and talkative as football players are
in the dressing room after a game.
'That's one for the medical journal, George,' he said.
'Doing a Caesarian with a jack-knife and sewing it up with
nine-foot, tapered gut
leaders.'
Uncle George was standing against the wall, looking at his
arm.
'Oh, you're a great man, all right,' he said.
'Ought to have a look at the proud father. They're usually
the worst sufferers in these little affairs,' the doctor said. 'I
must say he took it all pretty quietly.'
He pulled back the blanket from the Indian's head. His
hand came away wet. He mounted on the edge of the lower
bunk with the lamp in one hand and looked in. The Indian
lay with his face toward the wall. His throat had been cut
INDIAN CAMP 99
from ear to ear. The blood had flowed down into a pool
where his body sagged
the bunk. His head rested on his left
arm. The open razor lay, edge up,
in the blankets.
'Take Nick out of the shanty, George,'
the doctor said.
There was no need of that. Nick, standing
in the- door of
the kitchen, h*ad a good view of the upper bunk when his
father, the lamp in one hand, tipped
the Indian's head back.
It was just beginning to be daylight when they walked
along the logging road back toward the lake.
'I'm terribly sorry
I brought you along, Nickie,' said his
father, all his post-operative
exhilaration gone.
'It was an
awful mess to put you through.'
'Do ladies always have such a hard time having babies?'
Nick asked.
'No, that was very, very exceptional.'
'Why did he kill himself, Daddy?'
'I don't know, Nick. He couldn't stand things,
I guess.'
'Do many men kill themselves, Daddy?'
'Not very many, Nick.'
'Do many women?'
'Hardly ever.'
'Don't they ever?'
'Oh, yes. They do sometimes.'
'Daddy?'
'Yes.'
'Where did Uncle George go?'
'He'll turn up all right.'
'Is dying hard, Daddy?'
'No, I think it's pretty easy, Nick. It all depends.'
They were seated in the boat, Nick in the stern, his father
rowing. The sun was coming up over the hills. A bass
jumped, making a circle in the water. Nick trailed his hand
in the water. It felt warm in the sharp
chill of the morning.
In the early morning on the lake sitting in the stern of the
boat with his father rowing, he felt quite
sure that he would
never die.
Minarets stuck up in the rain out of Adrianople across the mudflats.
The carts were jammed for thirty miles along
the Karagatch
road.
Water buffalo and cattle were hauling
carts through
the mud. No end
and no beginning. Just
carts loaded with everything they owned.
The old men and women, soaked through, walked along keeping
the
cattle moving. The Maritza was running yellow
almost up
to the
bridge. Carts were jammed solid on the bridge with camels bobbing
along through them. Greek cavalry herded along
the procession.
Women and kids were in the carts couched with mattressesy mirrors,
sewing machines, bundles. There was a woman having a kid with a
young girl holding a blanket over her and crying. Scared sick looking
at it. It rained all through
the evacuation.
THE DOCTOR AND THE
DOCTOR'S WIFE
DICK BOULTON came from the Indian camp to cut up logs
for Nick's father. He brought his son Eddy and another
Indian named Billy Tabeshaw with him. They came in
through the back gate out of the woods, Eddy carrying
the
long cross-cut saw. It flopped over his shoulder and made a
musical sound as he walked. Billy Tabeshaw carried two
big cant-hooks. Dick had three axes under his arm.
He turned and shut the gate. The others went on ahead of
him down to the lake shore where the logs were buried in the
sand.
The logs had been lost from the big log booms that were
towed down the lake to the mill by the steamer Magic. They
had drifted up on to the beach and if nothing were done
about them sooner or later the crew ofthe Magic would come
along the shore in a rowboat, spot
the logs, drive an iron spike
with a ring on it into the end of each one and then tow them
out into the lake to make a new boom. But the lumbermen
might never come for them because a few logs were not worth
100
THE DOCTOR AND THE DOCTORS WIFEioi
the price of a crew to gather them. If no one came for them
they would be left to waterlog and rot on the beach.
Nick's father always assumed that this was what would
happen, and hired the Indians to come down from the camp
and cut the logs up with the cross-cut saw and split them with
a wedge to make cord wood and chunks for the open
fireplace. Dick Boulton walked around past
the cottage down to
the lake. There were four big beech logs lying almost buried
in the sand. Eddy hung the saw up by one of its handles in
the crotch of a tree. Dick put
the three axes down on the
little dock. Dick was a half-breed and many of the farmers
around the lake believed he was really a white man. He was
very lazy but a great worker once he was started. He took a
plug of tobacco out of his pocket,
bit off a chew and spoke
in Ojibway to Eddy and Billy Tabeshaw.
They sunk the ends of their cant-hooks into one of the
logs and swung against it to loosen it in the sand. They
swung their weight against the shafts of the cant-hooks. The
log moved in the sand. Dick Boulton turned to Nick's father.
'Well, Doc,' he said, 'that's a nice lot of timber you've
stolen.'
'Don't talk that way, Dick,' the doctor said. 'It's driftwood.'
Eddy and Billy Tabeshaw had rocked the log out of the
wet sand and rolled it toward the water.
Tut it right in,' Dick Boulton shouted.
'What are you doing that for?' asked the doctor.
'Wash it off. Clean off the sand on account of the saw. I
want to see who it belongs to,' Dick said.
The log was just awash in the lake. Eddy and Billy Tabeshaw leaned on their cant-hooks sweating
in the sun. Dick
kneeled down in the sand and looked at the mark of the
sealer's hammer in the wood at the end of the log.
'It belongs to White and McNally,
5 he said, standing up
and brushing off his trousers knees.
The doctor was very
uncomfortable.
102 THE DOCTOR AND THE DOCTOR'S WIFE
'You'd better not saw it up then, Dick/ he said, shortly.
'Don't get huffy, Doc,' said Dick. 'Don't get huffy.
I
don't care who you steal from. It's none of my business.'
i
'If you think the logs are stolen, leave them alone and take
your tools back to the camp,'
the doctor said. His face was
red. r
'Don't go off at half cock, Doc,' Dick said. He spat tobacco
juice on the log.
It slid off, thinning
in the water. 'You
know they're stolen as well as I do. It don't make any
difference to me.'
'All right. If you think the logs are stolen, take your stuff
and get out.'
'Now, Doc '
'Take your stuff and get out.'
'Listen, Doc.'
'If you call me Doc once again,
I'll knock your eye teeth
down your throat.'
'Oh, no, you won't, Doc.
5
Dick Boulton looked at the doctor. Dick was a big man.
He knew how big a man he was. He liked to get
into fights.
He was happy. Eddy and Billy Tabeshaw leaned on their
cant-hooks and looked at the doctor. The doctor chewed the
beard on his lower lip and looked at Dick Boulton. Then he
turned away and walked up the hill to the cottage. They
could see from his back how angry he was. They all watched
him walk up the hill and go inside the cottage.
Dick said something in Ojibway. Eddy laughed but Billy
Tabeshaw looked very serious. He did not understand English but he had sweat all the time the row was going
on. He
was fat with only a few hairs of moustache like a Chinaman.
He picked up the two cant-hooks. Dick picked up the axes
and Eddy took the saw down from the tree. They started off
and walked up past the cottage and out the back gate into the
woods. Dick left the gate open. Billy Tabeshaw went back
and fastened it. They were gone through the woods.
In the cottage the doctor, sitting on the bed in his room,
THE DOCTOR AND THE DOCTOR'S WIFE 103
saw a pile of medical journals on the floor by the bureau.
They were still in their wrappers unopened. It irritated him.
'Aren't you going back to work, dear?' asked the doctor's
wife from the room where she was lying with the blinds
drawn.
'No!'
'Was anything the matter?'
'I had a row with Dick Boulton.'
'Oh/ said his wife. 'I hope you didn't lose your temper,
Henry.'
'No,' said the doctor.
jjthat he who ruleth his spirit
is greater than
taketh, a city,' said his wife. She was a Christian
Scientist. Her Bible, her copy of Science and Health and her
Quarterly were on a table beside her bed in the darkened
room.
Her husband did not answer. He was sitting on his bed
now, cleaning a shotgun. He pushed
the magazine full of
the heavy yellow shells and pumped them out again. They
were scattered on the bed.
'Henry,' his wife called. Then paused
a moment. 'Henry!'
'Yes,' the doctor said.
'You didn't say anything
to Boulton to anger him, did you?'
'No,' said the doctor.
'What was the trouble about, dear?'
'Nothing much.'
'Tell me, Henry. Please don't try and keep anything from
me. What was the trouble about?'
'Well, Dick owes me a lot of money for pulling
his squaw
through pneumonia and I guess he wanted a row so he
wouldn't have to take it out in work.'
His wife was silent. The doctor wiped his gun carefully
with a rag. He pushed the shells back in against the spring
of the magazine. He sat with the gun on his knees. He was
very fond of it. Then he heard his wife's voice from the
darkened room.
104 THE DOCTOR AND THE DOCTOR'S WIFE
'Dear, I don't think, I really don't think that anyone
would really do a thing
like that.'
'No?' the doctor said.
'No. I can't really believe that anyone would do a thing
of that sort intentionally.'
The doctor stood up and put the shotgun
in the corner
behind the dresser.
'Are you going out, dear?' his wife said.
'I think I'll go for a walk,
3 the doctor said.
'If you see Nick, dear, will you tell him his mother wants
to see him?' his wife said.
The doctor went out on the porch. The screen door
slammed behind him. He heard his wife catch her breath
when the door slammed.
'Sorry,' he said, outside her window with the blinds
drawn.
'It's all right, dear,' she said.
He walked in the heat out the gate and along the path into
the hemlock woods. It was cool in the woods even on such a
hot day. He found Nick sitting with his back against a tree,
reading.
'Your mother wants you to come and see her,' the doctor
said.
'I want to go with you,' Nick said.
His father looked down at him.
'All right. Come on, then,' his father said. 'Give me. the
book, I'll put it in my pocket.'
'I know where there's black squirrels, Daddy,' Nick said.
'All right/ said his father. 'Let's go there.'
We were in a garden
at Mons. Young Buckley came in with his patrol
from across the river. The first German I saw climbed up
over the
garden wall. We waited till he got one leg over and then potted him.
He had so much equipment
on and looked awfully surprised andfeil
down into the garden. Then three more came over farther down the
wall. We shot* them. They all came just
like that.
THE END OF SOMETHING
IN the old days Hortons Bay was a lumbering town. No one
who lived in it was out of sound of the big saws in the mill by
the lake. Then one year there were no more logs
to make
lumber. The lumber schooners came into the bay and were
loaded with the cut of the mill that stood stacked in the yard.
All the piles of lumber were carried away. The big
mill
building had all its machinery that was removable taken out
and hoisted on board one of the schooners by the men who
had worked in the mill. The schooner moved out of the bay
toward the open lake carrying the two great saws, the travelling carriage that hurled the logs against the revolving,
circular saws, and all the rollers, wheels, belts and iron piled
on a hull-deep load of lumber. Its open
hold covered with
canvas and lashed tight, the sails of the schooner filled and
it moved out into the open lake, carrying with it everything
that had made the mill a mill and Hortons Bay a town.
The one-story bunk houses, the eating-house, the company
store, the mill offices, and the big
mill itself stood deserted in
the acres of sawdust that covered the swampy meadow by
the shore of the bay.
Ten years later there was nothing of the mill left except
the broken white limestone ofits foundations showing through
the swampy second growth as Nick and Marjorie rowed
along the shore. They were trolling along the edge of the
channel bank where the bottom dropped
off suddenly from
io6 THE END OF SOMETHING
sandy shallows to twelve feet ofdark water. They were trolling
on their way to the point
to set night
lines for rainbow trout.
'There's our old ruin, Nick,' Marjorie
said.
Nick, rowing, looked at the white stone in the green trees.
'There it is,' he said.
'Can you remember when it was a mill?' Marjorie asked.
'I can just remember,' Nick said.
'It seems more like a castle,' Marjorie said.
Nick said nothing. They rowed on out of sight of the mill,
following the shore line. Then Nick cut across the bay.
'They aren't striking,' he said.
'No,' Marjorie said. She was intent on the rod all the time
they trolled, even when she talked. She loved to fish. She
loved to fish with Nick.
Close beside the boat a big
trout broke the surface of the
water. Nick pulled hard on one oar so the boat would turn
and the bait spinning
far behind would pass where the trout
was feeding. As the trout's back came up out ofthe water the
minnows jumped wildly. They sprinkled the surface like a
handful of shot thrown into the water. Another trout broke
water, feeding on the other side of the boat.
'They're feeding,' Marjorie
said.
'But they won't strike,' Nick said.
He rowed the boat around to troll past both the feeding
fish, then headed it for the point. Marjorie
did not reel in
until the boat touched the shore.
They pulled the boat up the beach and Nick lifted out a
pail of live perch. The perch swam in the water in the pail.
Nick caught three of them with his hands and cut their heads
off and skinned them while Marjorie chased with her hands
in the bucket, finally caught
a perch,
cut its head off and
skinned it. Nick looked at her fish.
'You don't want to take the ventral fin out,' he said. Til
be all right for bait but it's better with the ventral fin in.'
He hooked each of the skinned perch through the tail.
There were two hooks attached to a leader on each rod.
THE END OF SOMETHING 107
Then Marjorie rowed the boat out over the channel-bank,
holding the line in her teeth, and looking toward Nick, who
stood on the shore holding the rod and letting the line run
out from the reel.
'That's about right,' he called.
'Should I let it drop?' Marjorie
called back, holding the
line in her hand.
'Sure. Let it go.' Marjorie dropped
the line overboard and
watched the baits go down through the water.
She came in with the boat and ran the second line out the
same way. Each time Nick set a heavy slab of driftwood
across the butt of the rod to hold it solid and propped it up
at an angle with a small slab. He reeled in the slack line so
the line ran taut out to where the bait rested on the sandy
floor of the channel and set the click on the reel. When a
trout, feeding on the bottom, took the bait it would run with
it, taking line out of the reel in a rush and making the reel
sing with the click on.
Marjorie rowed up the point
a little way so she would not
disturb the line. She pulled hard on the oars and the boat
went way up the beach. Little waves came in with it. Marjorie stepped out of the boat and Nick pulled
the boat high
up the beach.
'What's the matter, Nick?' Marjorie
asked.
'I don't know,
5 Nick said, getting wood for a fire.
They made a fire with driftwood. Marjorie went to the
boat and brought
a blanket. The evening
breeze blew the
smoke toward the point,
so Marjorie spread
the blanket out
between the fire and the lake.
Marjorie sat on the blanket with her back to the fire and
waited for Nkk. He came over and sat down beside her on
the blanket. In back of them was the close second-growth
timber of the point and in front was the bay with the mouth
of Hortons Creek. It was not quite
dark. The fire-light went
as far as the water. They could both see the two steel rods
at an angle over the dark water. The fire glinted on the reels.
io8 THE END OF SOMETHING
Marjorie unpacked the basket of supper.
'I don't feel like eating,' said Nick.
'Come on and eat, Nick.'
'All right.'
They ate without talking, and watched the two rods and
the fire-light in the water.
'There's going to be a moon to-night,' said Nick. He looked
across the bay to the hills that were beginning to sharpen
against the sky. Beyond the hills he knew the moon was
coming up.
'I know it,' Marjorie
said happily.
'You know everything,' Nick said.
'Oh, Nick, please cut it out! Please, please don't be that
way!'
'I can't help it,' Nick said. 'You do. You know everything. That's the trouble. You know you do.'
Marjorie did not say anything.
'I've taught you everything. You know you do. What
don't you know, anyway?'
'Oh, shut up/ Marjorie
said. 'There comes the moon.'
They sat on the blanket without touching each other and
watched the moon rise.
'You don't have to talk silly/ Marjorie
said. 'What's really
the matter?'
'I don't know.'
'Of course you know.'
'No, I don't.'
*Go on and say
it.'
Nick looked on at the moon, coming up over the hills.
'It isn't fun any more.'
He was afraid to look at Marjorie. Then he looked at her.
She sat there with her back toward him. He looked at her
back. 'It isn't fun any more. Not any of it.'
She didn't say anything. He went on. 'I feel as though
everything was gone to hell inside of me. I don't know,
Marge. I don't know what to say.'
THE END OF SOMETHING 109
He looked on at her back.
'Isn't love any fun?' Marjorie
said.
'No,' Nick said. Marjorie stood up. Nick sat there, his
head in his hands.
'I'm going to take the boat,' Marjorie called to him. 'You
can walk back around the point.'
'All right,' Nick said. Til push the boat off for you.'
'You don't need to,' she said. She was afloat in the boat on
the water with the moonlight on it. Nick went back and lay
down with his face in the blanket by the fire. He could hear
Marjorie rowing on the water.
He lay there for a long time. He lay
there while he heard
Bill come into the clearing walking around through the
woods. He felt Bill coming up to the fire. Bill didn't touch
him, either.
'Did she go all right?'
Bill said.
'Yes,' Nick said, lying,
his face on the blanket.
'Have a scene?'
'No, there wasn't any scene.'
'How do you feel?'
'Oh, go away, Bill! Go away for a while.'
Bill selected a sandwich from the lunch basket and walked
over to have a look at the rods.
// was afrightfully hot day. We'djammed
an absolutely perfect
barricade across the bridge.
It was simply priceless. A big old wroughtiron gratingfrom thefront of
a house. Too heavy
to lift andyou could
shot through it and they would have to climb over it. It was absolutely topping. They
tried to get
over it, and we potted them from
forty yards. They rushed it, and officers came out alone and worked
on it. It was an absolutely perfect
obstacle. Their officers were very
jine. We werefrightfully put
out when we heard the flank had gone,
and we had to fall back.
THE THREE-DAY BLOW
THE rain stopped
as Nick turned into the road that went up
through the orchard. The fruit had been picked and the fall
wind blew through
the bare trees. Nick stopped and picked
up a Wagner apple from beside the road, shiny
in the brown
grass from the rain. He put the apple
in the pocket
of his
Mackinaw coat.
The road came out of the orchard on to the top of the hill.
There was the cottage, the porch bare, smoke coming from the
chimney. In back was the garage,
the chicken coop and the
second-growth timber like a hedge against the woods behind.
The big trees swayed far over in the wind as he watched. It
was the first of the autumn storms.
As Nick crossed the open
field above the orchard the door
of the cottage opened and Bill came out. He stood on the
porch looking out.
'Well, Wemedge?' he said.
'Hey, Bill,' Nick said, coming up the steps.
They stood together, looking out across the country, down
over the orchard, beyond the road, across the lower fields and
the woods of the point
to the lake. The wind was blowing
straight down the lake. They could see the surf along Ten
Mile point.
'She's blowing,' Nick said.
no
THE THREE-DAY BLOW m
'She'll blow like that for three days,'
Bill said.
'Is your dad in?' Nick said.
'No. He's out with the gun. Come on in.'
Nick went inside the cottage. There was a big fire in thp
fireplace. The wind made it roar. Bill shut the door.
'Have a drink?' he said.
He went out to the kitchen and came back with two glasses
and a pitcher of water. Nick reached the whisky bottle from
the shelf above the fireplace.
'All right?' he said.
'Good,' said Bill.
They sat in front of the fire and drank the Irish whisky and
water.
'It's got a swell, smoky taste,' Nick said, and looked at the
fire through the glass.
'That's the peat,'
Bill said.
'You can't get peat
into liquor,' Nick said.
'That doesn't make any difference,' Bill said.
'You ever seen any peat?' Nick asked.
'No,' said Bill.
'Neither have I,' Nick said.
His shoes, stretched out on the hearth, began to steam in
front of the fire.
'Better take your shoes off,' Bill said.
'I haven't got any socks on.'
'Take them off and dry them and I'll get you some,' Bill
said. He went upstairs into the loft and Nick heard him
walking about overhead. Upstairs was open under the roof
and was where Bill and his father and he, Nick, sometimes
slept. In back was a dressing room. They moved the cots
back out of the rain and covered them with rubber blankets.
Bill came down with a pair of heavy wool socks.
'It's getting too late to go around without socks,' he said.
'I hate to start them again,' Nick said. He pulled
the socks
on and slumped back in the chair, putting
his feet up on the
screen in front of the fire.
ii2 THE THREE-DAY BLOW
'You'll dent in the screen/ Bill said. Nick swung his feet
over to the side of the fireplace.
'Got anything to read?' he asked.
'Only the paper.' "
'What did the Cards do?'
'Dropped a double header to the Giants.'
'That ought to cinch it for them.'
'It's a gift,' Bill said. 'As long as McGraw can buy every
good ball player in the league there's nothing to it.'
'He can't buy them all/ Nick said.
'He buys all the ones he wants/ Bill said. 'Or he makes
them discontented so they have to trade them to him.'
'Like Heinie Zim/ Nick agreed.
'That bonehead will do him a lot of good.'
Bill stood up.
'He can hit/ Nick offered. The heat from the fire was
baking his legs.
'He's a sweet fielder, too/ Bill said. 'But he loses ball
games.'
'Maybe that's what McGraw wants him for/ Nick
suggested.
'Maybe/ Bill agreed.
'There's more always to it than we know about/ Nick said.
'Of course. But we've got pretty good dope for being so
far away.'
'Like how much better you can pick them if you don't see
the horses.'
'That's it.'
Bill reached down the whisky bottle. His big hand went
all the way around it. He poured the whisky
into the glass
Nick held out.
'How much water?'
'Just the same.'
He sat down on the floor beside Nick's chair.
'It's good when the fall storms come, isn't it?' Nick said.
'It's swell.'
THE THREE-DAY BLOW 113.
'It's the best time of year,
5 Nick said.
'Wouldn't it be hell to be in town?' Bill said.
'I'd like to see the World Series,' Nick said.
'Well, they're always in New York or Philadelphia now/
Bill said. 'That doesn't do us any good.'
'I wonder if the Cards will ever win a pennant?'
'Not in our lifetime,'
Bill said.
'Gee, they'd go crazy,' Nick said.
'Do you remember when they got going that once before
they had the train wreck?'
'Boy!' Nick said, remembering.
Bill reached over to the table under the window for the
book that lay there, face down, where he had put
it when he
went to the door. He held his glass in one hand and the book
in the other, leaning back against Nick's chair.
'What are you reading?'
'Richard Feverel'
'I couldn't get into it.'
'It's all right,' Bill said. 'It ain't a bad book, Wemedge.'
'What else have you got
I haven't read?' Nick asked.
'Did you read the Forest Lovers?'
'Yup. That's the one where they go to bed every night
with the naked sword between them.'
'That's a good book, Wemedge.'
'It's a swell book. What I couldn't ever understand was
what good the sword would do. It would have to stay edge
up all the time because if it went over flat you could roll right
over it and it wouldn't make any trouble.'
'It's a symbol,' Bill said.
'Sure,' said Nick, 'but it isn't practical.'
'Did you ever read Fortitude?
'It's fine,' Nick said. 'That's a real book. That's where his
old man is after him all the time. Have you got any more by
Walpole?' ,
'The Dark Forest,' Bill said. 'It's about Russia.'
'What does he know about Russia?' Nick asked.
H
ii 4 THE THREE-DAY BLOW
'I don't know. You can't ever tell about those guys.
Maybe he was there when he was a boy. He's got a lot of
dope on it.'
Td like to meet him,' Nick said.
'I'd like to meet Chesterton,' Bill said.
'I wist he was here now,' Nick said. 'We'd take him fishing
to the 'Voix to-morrow.'
'I wonder if he'd like to go fishing,'
Bill said.
'Sure/ said Nick. 'He must be about the best guy there is.
Do you remember the Flying Inn?
'If an angel out of heaven
Gives you something else to drink,
Thank him for his kind intentions;
Go and pour them down the sink!'
'That's right,' said Nick. 'I guess
he's a better guy than
Walpole.'
'Oh, he's a better guy,
all right,'
Bill said.
'But Walpole's a better writer.'
'I don't know,' Nick said. 'Chesterton's a classic.'
*
Walpole's a classic, too,'
Bill insisted.
'I wish we had them both here,' Nick said. 'We'd take
them both fishing
to the 'Voix to-morrow.'
'Let's get drunk,' Bill said.
'All right,' Nick agreed.
'My old man won't care,' Bill said.
'Are you sure?' said Nick.
'I know it,' Bill said.
'I'm a little drunk now,' Nick said.
'You aren't drunk,' Bill said.
He got up from the floor and reached for the whisky bottle.
Nick held out his glass. His eyes fixed on it while Bill poured.
Bill poured the glass half full of whisky.
'Put in your own water,' he said. 'There's just one more
shot.'
'Got any more?' Nick asked.
THE THREE-DAY BLOW 115
'There's plenty more but dad only likes me to drink what's
open.
5
'Sure,
5
said Nick.
'He says opening
bottles is what makes drunkards,
5
Bili
explained.
'That's right,
5
said Nick. He was impressed. He had never
thought of that before. He had always thought it was solitary
drinking that made drunkards.
'How is your dad?
5 he asked respectfully.
'He's all right,'
Bill said. 'He gets a little wild sometimes.'
'He's a swell guy,' Nick said. He poured water into his
glass out of the pitcher.
It mixed slowly with the whisky.
There was more whisky than water.
'You bet your life he is,' Bill said.
'My old man's all right,' Nick said.
'You're damn right he is,' said Bill.
'He claims he's never taken a drink in his life,' Nick said, as
though announcing a scientific fact.
'Well, he's a doctor. My old man's a painter. That's
different.'
'He's missed a lot,' Nick said sadly.
'You can't tell,' Bill said. 'Everything's got
its compensations.'
'He says he's missed a lot himself,
5 Nick confessed.
'Well, dad's had a tough time,' Bill said.
'It all evens up,
5 Nick said.
They sat looking into the fire and thinking of this profound
truth.
Til get a chunk from the back porch,
5 Nick said. He had
noticed while looking into the fire that the fire was dying
down. Also he wished to show he could hold his liquor and
be practical. Even if his father had never touched a drop
Bill was not going to get him drunk before he himself was
drunk.
'Bring one of the big beech chunks,
3
Bill said. He was also
being consciously practical.
n6 THE THREE-DAY BLOW
Nick came in with the log through the kitchen and in
passing knocked a pan off the kitchen table. He laid the log
down and picked up
the pan.
It had contained dried apricots,
c oaking in water. He carefully picked up all the apricots off
the floor, some of them had gone under the stove, and put
them back in the pan. He dipped some more water on to
them from the pail by the table. He felt quite proud of
himself. He had been thoroughly practical.
He came in carrying
the log and Bill got up from the chair
and helped him put
it on the fire.
That's a swell log,
5 Nick said.
Td been saving
it for the bad weather,' Bill said. 'A log
like that will burn all night.'
'There'll be coals left to start the fire in the morning,' Nick
said.
'That's right,' Bill agreed. They were conducting the
conversation on a high plane.
'Let's have another drink,' Nick said.
'I think there's another bottle open in the locker,' Bill said.
He kneeled down in the corner in front of the locker and
brought out a square-faced
bottle.
'It's Scotch,' he said.
Til get some more water,' Nick said. He went out into
the kitchen again. He filled the pitcher with the dipper,
dipping cold spring water from the pail. On his way back
to the living room he passed a mirror in the dining room and
looked in it. His face looked strange. He smiled at the face
in the mirror and it grinned back at him. He winked at it
and went on. It was not his face but it didn't make any
difference.
Bill had poured out the drinks.
'That's an awfully big shot,' Nick said.
'Not for us, Wemedge,' Bill said.
'What'll we drink to?' Nick asked, holding up the glass.
'Let's drink to fishing,'
Bill said.
'All right,' Nick said. 'Gentlemen, I give you fishing/
THE THREE-DAY BLOW 117
'All fishing,' Bill said. 'Everywhere.'
'Fishing,' Nick said. 'That's what we drink to.'
'It's better than baseball,' Bill said.
'There isn't any comparison,' said Nick. 'How did we eve*
get talking about baseball?'
'It was a mistake,' Bill said. 'Baseball is a game for louts.'
They drank all that was in their glasses.
'Now let's drink to Chesterton.'
'And Walpole,' Nick interposed.
Nick poured out the liquor.
Bill poured in the water.
They looked at each other. They felt very fine.
'Gentlemen,' Bill said, 'I give you Chesterton and Walpole.'
'Exactly, gentlemen,' Nick said.
They drank. Bill filled up
the glasses. They sat down in
the big chairs in front of the fire.
'You were very wise, Wemedge,' Bill said.
'What do you mean?' asked Nick.
'To bust off that Marge business,' Bill said.
T guess so,' said Nick.
'It was the only thing to do. Ifyou hadn't, by now you'd be
back home working trying
to get enough money to get married . '
Nick said nothing.
'Once a man's married he's absolutely bitched,' Bill went
on. 'He hasn't got anything more. Nothing. Not a damn
thing. He's done for. You've seen the guys that get married.'
Nick said nothing.
'You can tell them/ Bill said. 'They get
this sort of fat
married look. They're done for.'
'Sure,' said Nick.
'It was probably bad busting it off,' Bill said. 'But you
always fall for somebody else and then it's all right. Fall
for them but don't let them ruin you.'
'Yes,' said Nick.
'If you'd have married her you would have had to marry
the whole family. Remember her mother and that guy she
married
'
n8 THE THREE-DAY BLOW
Nick nodded.
'Imagine having them around the house all the time and
going to Sunday dinners at their house, and having them
9ver to dinner and her telling Marge all the time what to
do and how to act.'
Nick sat quiet.
'You came out of it damned well/ Bill said. 'Now she can
marry somebody of her own sort and settle down and be
happy. You can't mix oil and water and you can't mix that
sort of thing any more than if I'd marry Ida that works for
Strattons. She'd probably like it, too.'
Nick said nothing. The liquor had all died out of him and
left him alone. Bill wasn't there. He wasn't sitting in front
of the fire or going fishing to-morrow with Bill and his dad
or anything. He wasn't drunk. It was all gone. All he knew
was that he had once had Marjorie and that he had lost her.
She was gone and he had sent her away. That was all that
mattered. He might never see her again. Probably he never
would. It was all gone, finished.
'Let's have another drink,' Nick said.
Bill poured it out. Nick splashed
in a little water.
'If you'd gone on that way we wouldn't be here now,'
Bill said.
That was true. His original plan had been to go down
home and get a job. Then he had planned to stay
in Charlevoix all winter so he could be near Marge. Now he did not
know what he was going to do.
'Probably we wouldn't even be going fishing to-morrow,'
Bill said. 'You had the right dope,
all right.'
'I couldn't help it,' Nick said.
'I know. That's the way it works out,' Bill said.
'All of a sudden everything was over,' Nick said. 'I don't
know why it was. I couldn't help
it. Just
like when the
three-day blows come now and rip
all the leaves off the
trees.'
'Well, it's over. That's the point,'
Bill said.
THE THREE-DAY BLOW n^
'It was my fault/ Nick said.
'It doesn't make any difference whose fault it was/ Bill
said.
'No, I suppose not/ Nick said.
The big thing was that Marjorie was gone and that probably he would never see her again. He had talked to her
about how they would go to Italy together and the fun they
would have. Places they would be together.
It was all gone
now.
'So long as it's over that's all that matters/ Bill said. 'I tell
you, Wemedge, I was worried while it was going on. You
played it right. I understand her mother is sore as hell.
She told a lot of people you were engaged.'
'We weren't engaged/ Nick said.
'It was all around that you were.'
'I can't help it/ Nick said. 'We weren't.'
'Weren't you going
to get married?' Bill asked.
'Yes. But we weren't engaged/ Nick said.
'What's the difference?' Bill asked judicially.
'I don't know. There's a difference.'
'I don't see it/ said Bill.
'All right/ said Nick. 'Let's get drunk.'
'All right/ Bill said. 'Let's get really drunk.'
'Let's get drunk and then go swimming/ Nick said.
He drank off his glass. Tm as sorry as hell about her but what could I do?' he
said. 'You know what her mother was like!'
'She was terrible/ Bill said.
'All of a sudden it was over/ Nick said. 'I oughtn't
to talk
about it.'
'You aren't/ Bill said. 'I talked about it and now I'm
through. We won't ever speak about it again. You don't
want to think about it. You might get back into it again.'
Nick had not thought about that. It had seemed so
absolute. That was a thought. That made him feel better,
'Sure/ he said. 'There's always that danger.'
120 THE THREE-DAY BLOW
He felt happy now. There was not anything
that was
irrevocable. He might go into town Saturday night. Today was Thursday.
'There's always
a chance/ he said.
'You'll have to watch yourself/
Bill said.
Til watch myself/ he said.
He felt happy. Nothing was finished. Nothing was ever
lost. He would go into town on Saturday. He felt lighter,
as he had felt before Bill started to talk about it. There was
always a way out.
'Let's take the guns and go down to the point and look for
your dad/ Nick said.
'All right.'
Bill took down the two shotguns from the rack on the wall.
He opened a box of shells. Nick put on his Mackinaw coat
and his shoes. His shoes were stiff from the drying. He was
still quite drunk but his head was clear.
'How do you feel?' Nick asked.
'Swell. I've just got a good edge
on.' Bill was buttoning up
his sweater.
'There's no use getting drunk.'
'No. We ought
to get outdoors.'
They stepped out the door. The wind was blowing a gale.
'The birds will lie right down in the grass with this/ Nick
said.
They struck down toward the orchard.
'I saw a woodcock this morning/ Bill said.
'Maybe we'll jump him/ Nick said.
'You can't shoot in this wind/ Bill said.
Outside now the Marge business was no longer so tragic.
It was not even very important. The wind blew everything
like that away.
'It's coming right off the big lake/ Nick said.
Against the wind they heard the thud of a shotgun.
'That's dad/ Bill said. 'He's down in the swamp.'
'Let's cut down that way/ Nick said.
THE THREE-DAY BLOW 121
'Let's cut across the lower meadow and see if we jump
anything/ Bill said.
'All right,' Nick said.
None ofit was important now. The wind blew it out of hij
head. Still he could always go into town Saturday night.
It was a good' thing to have in reserve.
They shot the six cabinet ministers at half-past
six in the morning
against the wall of
a hospital. There were pools of water in the
courtyard. There were wet dead leaves on the paving of
the courtyard.
ft rained hard. All the shutters of
the hospital were nailed shut.
One of the ministers was sick with typhoid. Two soldiers carried
him downstairs and out into the rain. They tried to hold him up
against the wall but he sat down in a puddle of water. The other
Jive stood very quietly against
the wall. Finally
the officer told the
soldiers it was no good trying
to make him stand up. When they fired
the first volley he was sitting down in the water with his head on his
knees.
THE BATTLER
NICK stood up. He was all right. He looked up the track at
the lights of the caboose going
out of sight around the curve.
There was water on both sides of the track, then tamarack
swamp.
He felt of his knee. The pants were torn and the skin was
barked. His hands were scraped and there were sand and
cinders driven up under his nails. He went over to the edge
of the track down the little slope
to the water and washed
his hands. He washed them carefully in the cold water,
getting the dirt out from the nails. He squatted down and
bathed his knee.
That lousy crut of a brakeman. He would get him some
day. He would know him again. That was a fine way to act.
'Come here, kid,' he said. 'I got something for you.'
He had fallen for it. What a lousy
kid thing
to have done.
They would never suck him in that way again.
'Come here, kid, I got something for you.' Then wham
and he lit on his hands and knees beside the track.
Nick rubbed his eye. There was a big bump coming up.
122
THE BATTLER 123
He would have a black eye,
all right.
It ached already.
That son of a crutting brakeman.
He touched the bump over his eye with his fingers. Oh,
well, it was only a black eye. That was all he had gotten oirt
of it. Cheap at the price. He wished he could see it. Could
not see it looking into the water, though. It was dark and he
was a long way off from anywhere. He wiped
his hands on
his trousers and stood up, then climbed the embankment to
the rails.
He started up the track. It was well ballasted and made
easy walking, sand and gravel packed between the ties, solid
walking. The smooth roadbed like a- causeway went on
ahead through the swamp. Nick walked along. He must get
to somewhere.
Nick had swung on to the freight train when it slowed
down for the yards outside of Walton Junction. The train,
with Nick on it, had passed through Kalkaska as it started
to get dark. Now he must be nearly
to Mancelona. Three or
four miles of swamp. He stepped along the track, walking
so he kept on the ballast between the ties, the swamp ghostly
in the rising mist. His eye ached and he was hungry. He
kept on hiking, putting
the miles of track back of him. The
swamp was all the same on both sides of the track.
Ahead there was a bridge. Nick crossed it, his boots
ringing hollow on the iron. Down below the water showed
black between the slits of ties. Nick kicked a loose spike and
it dropped into the water. Beyond the bridge were hills.
It was high and dark on both sides of the track. Up the track
Nick saw a fire.
He came up the track toward the fire carefully.
It was off
to one side of the track, below the railway embankment. He
had only seen the light from it. The track came out through
a cut and where the fire was burning the country opened
out
and fell away into woods. Nick dropped carefully down the
embankment and cut into the woods to come up
to the fire
through the trees. It was a beechwood forest and the fallen
i24 THE BATTLER
beechnut burrs were under his shoes as he walked between
the trees. The fire was bright now, just
at the edge of the
trees. There was a man sitting by it. Nick waited behind
the tree and watched. The man looked to be alone. He was
sitting there with his head in his hands looking at the fire.
Nick stepped out and walked into the firelight.'
The man sat there looking
into the fire. When Nick
stopped quite close to him he did not move.
'Hello!' Nick said.
The man looked up.
'Where did you get the shiner?
5 he said.
'A brakeman busted me.'
'Off the through freight?'
'Yes.'
'I saw the bastard,' the man said. 'He went through here
'bout an hour and a half ago. He was walking along the top
of the cars slapping
his arms and singing.'
'The bastard!'
'It must have made him feel good to bust you,' the man said
seriously.
Til bust him. 5
'Get him with a rock sometime when he's going through,'
the man advised.
Til get him.'
'You're a tough one, aren't you?'
'No,' Nick answered.
'All you kids are tough.'
'You got to be tough,' Nick said.
'That's what I said.'
The man looked at Nick and smiled. In the firelight Nick
saw that his face was misshapen.
His nose was sunken, his
eyes were slits, he had queer-shaped lips. Nick did not perceive all this at once, he only saw the man's face was queerly
formed and mutilated. It was like putty
in colour. Dead
looking in the firelight.
'Don't you like my pan?'
the man asked.
THE BATTLER 125
Nick was embarrassed.
'Sure/ he said.
'Look here!' the man took off his cap.
He had only one eai. It was thickened and tight againrt
the side of his head. Where the other ear should h%ve been
there was a stump.
'Ever see one like that?'
'No/ said Nick. It made him a little sick.
'I could take it/ the man said. 'Don't you think I could
take it, kid?'
'You bet!'
'They all bust their hands on me/ the little man said
'They couldn't hurt me.'
He looked at Nick. 'Sit down/ he said. 'Want to eat?'
'Don't bother/ Nick said. Tm going on to the town.'
'Listen!' the man said. 'Gall me Ad.'
'Sure!'
'Listen/ the little man said. Tm not quite right.'
'What's the matter?'
'I'm crazy.'
He put on his cap. Nick felt like laughing.
'You're all right/ he said.
'No, I'm not. I'm crazy. Listen, you ever been crazy?'
'No/ Nick said. 'How does it get you?'
'I don't know/ Ad said. 'When you got
it you don't know
about it. You know me, don't you?'
'No.'
Tm Ad Francis.'
'Honest to God?'
'Don't you believe it?'
'Yes.'
Nick knew it must be true.
'You know how I beat them?'
'No/ Nick said.
'My heart's slow. It only
beats forty a minute. Feel it/
Nick hesitated.
126 THE BATTLER
'Come on,' the man took hold of his hand. 'Take hold of
my wrist. Put your fingers
there.'
The little man's wrist was thick and the muscles bulged
*?bove the bone. Nick felt the slow pumping under his fingers.
'Got # watch?'
'No.'
'Neither have I,' Ad said. 'It ain't any good if you haven't
got a watch.'
Nick dropped his wrist.
'Listen,' Ad Francis said. 'Take ahold again. You count
and I'll count up to sixty.'
Feeling the slow hard throb under his fingers Nick started
to count. He heard the little man counting slowly, one, two,
three, four, five, and on aloud.
'Sixty,' Ad finished. 'That's a minute. What did you
make it?'
'Forty,' Nick said.
'That's right,' Ad said happily. 'She never speeds up.'
A man dropped down the railroad embankment and came
across the clearing
to the fire.
'Hello, Bugs!' Ad said.
'Hello!' Bugs answered. It was a negro's
voice. Nick
knew from the way he walked that he was a negro. He
stood with his back to them, bending over the fire. He
straightened up.
'This is my pal Bugs,' Ad said. 'He's crazy,
too.'
'Glad to meet you,' Bugs said. 'Where you say you're
from?'
'Chicago,' Nick said.
'That's a fine town,' the negro said. 'I didn't catch your
name.'
"Adams. Nick Adams.'
'He says he's never been crazy. Bugs,' Ad said.
'He's got a lot coming to him/ the negro said. He was
unwrapping a package by the fire.
'When are we going to eat, Bugs?' the prizefighter asked.
THE BATTLER 127
'
Right away.'
'Are you hungry, Nick?'
'Hungry as hell.'
'Hear that, Bugs?'
'I hear most of what goes on.'
That ain't What I asked you.'
'Yes. I heard what the gentleman said.'
Into a skillet he was laying slices of ham. As the skillet
grew hot the grease sputtered and Bugs, crouching on long
nigger legs over the fire, turned the ham and broke eggs
into
the skillet, tipping
it from side to side to baste the eggs with
the hot fat.
'Will you cut some bread out of that bag. Mister Adams?'
Bugs turned from the fire.
'Sure.'
Nick reached in the bag and brought out a loaf of bread.
He cut six slices. Ad watched him and leaned forward.
'Let me take your knife, Nick,' he said.
'No, you don't,' the negro said. 'Hang on to your knife,
Mister Adams.'
The prizefighter
sat back.
'Will you bring me the bread, Mister Adams?' Bugs asked.
Nick brought it over.
'Do you like to dip your bread in the ham fat?' the negro
asked.
'You bet!'
'Perhaps we'd better wait until later. It's better at the
finish of the meal. Here.'
The negro picked up a slice ofham and laid it on one of the
pieces of bread, then slid an egg on top of it.
'Just close that sandwich, will you, please, and give
it to
Mister Francis.'
Ad took the sandwich and started eating.
'Watch out how that egg runs/ the negro warned. 'This is
for you, Mister Adams. The remainder for myself.
5
Nick bit into the sandwich. The negro was sitting opposite
iz8 THE BATTLER
him beside Ad. The hot fried ham and eggs tasted
wonderful.
'Mister Adams is right hungry,'
the negro said. The little
coian whom Nick knew by name as a former champion fighter
was silent. He had said nothing since the negro had spoken
about the knife.
'May I offer you a slice of bread dipped right
in the hot
ham fat?' Bugs said.
Thanks a lot.'
The little white man looked at Nick.
'Will you have some, Mister Adolph Francis?' Bugs offered
from the skillet.
Ad did not answer. He was looking at Nick.
'Mister Francis?' came the nigger's
soft voice.
Ad did not answer. He was looking at Nick.
'I spoke to you, Mister Francis,' the nigger
said softly.
Ad kept on looking at Nick. He had his cap down over his
eyes. Nick felt nervous.
'How the hell do you get that way?' came out from under
the cap sharply at Nick. 'Who the hell do you think you are?
You're a snotty bastard. You come in here where nobody
asks you and eat a man's food and when he asks to borrow a
knife you get snotty.'
He glared at Nick, his face was white and his eyes almost
out of sight under the cap.
'You're a hot sketch. Who the hell asked you to butt in
here?'
'Nobody.'
'You're damn right nobody did. Nobody asked you to stay
either. You come in here and act snotty about my face and
smoke my cigars and drink my liquor and then talk snotty.
Where the hell do you think you get
off?'
Nick said nothing. Ad stood up.
Til tell you, you yellow-livered Chicago bastard. You're
going to get youi; can knocked off. Do you get that?'
Nick stepped back. The little man came toward him
THE BATTLER 129
slowly, stepping flat-footed forward, his left foot stepping
forward, his right dragging up to it.
'Hit me/ he moved his head. 'Try and hit me.'
'I don't want to hit you.'
'You won't get out of it that way. You're going to take a
beating, see? Come on and lead at me.'
'Cut it out,' Nick said.
'All right, then, you bastard.'
The little man looked down at Niek's feet. As he looked
down the negro, who had followed behind him as he moved
away from the fire, set himself and tapped him across the
base ofthe skull. He fell forward and Bugs dropped the clothwrapped blackjack on the grass. The little man lay there,
his face in the grass. The negro picked him up,
his head
hanging, and carried him to the fire. His face looked bad,
the eyes open. Bugs laid him down gently.
'Will you bring me the water in the bucket, Mister Adams?'
he said. 'I'm afraid I hit him just a little hard.'
The negro splashed water with his hand on the man's face
and pulled his ear gently. The eyes
closed.
Bugs stood up.
'He's all right,' he said. 'There's nothing to worry about.
I'm sorry, Mister Adams.'
'It's all right.' Nick was looking down at the little man.
He saw the blackjack on the grass and picked it up. It had a
flexible handle and was limber in his hand. It was made of
worn black leather with a handkerchief wrapped around the
heavy end.
'That's a whalebone handle,' the negro smiled. 'They
don't make them any more. I didn't know how well you
could take care of yourself and, anyway,
I didn't want you
to hurt him or mark him up no more than he is.'
The negro smiled again.
'You hurt him yourself.'
'I know how to do it. He won't remember nothing
of it. I
have to do it to change him when he gets that way.'
i 3 o THE BATTLER
Nick was still looking down at the little man, lying,
his eyes
closed in the firelight. Bugs put some wood on the fire.
'Don't you worry about him none. Mister Adams. I seen
Mm like this plenty of times before.'
'Whavmade him crazy?' Nick asked.
'Oh, a lot of things,' the negro answered from the fire.
'Would you like a cup
of this coffee, Mister Adams?'
He handed Nick the cup and smoothed the coat he had
placed under the unconscious man's head.
'He took too many beatings,
for one thing,' the negro sipped
the coffee. 'But that just made him sort of simple. Then his
sister was his manager and they was always being written
up in the papers
all about brothers and sisters and how
she loved her brother and how he loved his sister, and
then they got married in New York and that made a lot of
unpleasantness.'
'I remember about it.'
'Sure. Of course they wasn't brother and sister no more
than a rabbit, but there was a lot of people
didn't like it
either way and they commenced to have disagreements, and
one day she just went off and never come back.'
He drank the coffee and wiped his lips with the pink palm
of his hand.
'He just went crazy. Will you have some more coffee,
Mister Adams?'
'Thanks.'
'I seen her a couple of times,' the negro went on. 'She was
an awful good-looking woman. Looked enough like him to
be twins. He wouldn't be bad-looking without his face all
busted.'
He stopped. The story seemed to be over.
6 Where did you meet him?' asked Nick.
'I met him in jail,' the negro said. 'He was busting people
all the time after she went away and they put him in jail. I
was in for cuttin' a man.'
He smiled, and went on soft-voiced:
THE BATTLER 131
'Right away I liked him and when I got out I looked him
up. He likes to think I'm crazy and I don't mind. I like to be
with him and I like seeing the country and I don't have to
commit no larceny to do it. I like living
like a gentleman.'
'What do you all do?' Nick asked.
'Oh, nothing. Just move around. He's got money.'
'He must have made a lot of money.'
'Sure. He spent
all his money, though. Or they took it
away from him. She sends him money.'
He poked up the fire.
'She's a mighty fine woman,' he said. 'She looks enough
like him to be his own twin.'
The negro looked over at the little man, lying breathing
heavily. His blond hair was down over his forehead. His
mutilated face looked childish in repose.
'I can wake him up any time now, Mister Adams. If you
don't mind I wish you'd sort of pull
out. I don't like to not
be hospitable, but it might disturb him back again to see you.
I hate to have to thump him and it's the only thing
to do
when he gets started. I have to sort of keep him away from
people. You don't mind, do you, Mister Adams? No, don't
thank me, Mister Adams. I'd have warned you about him
but he seemed to have taken such a liking
to you and I
thought things were going to be all right. You'll hit a town
about two miles up the track. Mancelona they call it. Goodbye. I wish we could ask you to stay the night but it's just
out of the question. Would you like to take some of that ham
and some bread with you? No? You better take a sandwich,'
all this in a low, smooth, polite nigger
voice.
'Good. Well, good-bye, Mister Adams. Good-bye and
good luck!'
Nick walked away from the fire across the clearing
to the
railway tracks. Out of the range
of the fire he listened. The
low soft voice of the negro was talking. Nick could not hear
the words. Then he heard the little man say,
'I got an awful
headache, Bugs.'
132 THE BATTLER
'You'll feel better. Mister Francis,' the negro's voice
soothed. 'Just you drink a cup of this hot coffee.'
Nick climbed the embankment and started up the track.
He found he had a ham sandwich in his hand and put it in
his pocket. Looking back from the mounting grade before
the track curved into the hills he could see the firelight in the
clearing.
Nick sat against the wall of the church where they had dragged him to
be clear of machine-gun fire in the street. Both legs stuck out awkwardly. He had been hit in the spine. Hisface was sweaty and dirty.
The sun shone on his face. The day was very
hot. Rinaldi, big
backed, his equipment sprawling, layface downward against
the wall.
Nick looked straight ahead brilliantly. The pink
wall of
the house
opposite had fallen
out from the roof, and an iron bedstead hung
twisted toward the street. Two Austrian dead lay
in the rubble in the
shade of the house. Up the street were other dead. Things were
getting forward in the town. It was going
well. Stretcher bearers
would be along any
time now. Nick turned his head carefully and
looked at Rinaldi. 'Senta Rinaldi. Senta. You and me we've made
a separate peace.'' Rinaldi lay
still in the sun breathing with difficulty.
'Not patriots' Nick turned his head carefully away smiling sweatily.
Rinaldi was a disappointing
audience.
A VERY SHORT STORY
ONE hot evening in Padua they
carried him up
on to the roof
and he could look out over the top of the town. There were
chimney swifts in the sky. After a while it got dark and the
searchlights came out. The others went down and took the
bottles with them. He and Luz could hear them below on
the balcony. Luz sat on the bed. She was cool and fresh in
the hot night.
Luz stayed on night duty for three months. They were
glad to let her. When they operated on him she prepared
him for the operating table; and they had a joke about friend
or enema. He went under the anaesthetic holding tight on to
himself so he would not blab about anything during
the silly,
talky time. After he got on crutches he used to take the
temperatures so Luz would not have to get up
from the bed.
There were only a few patients, and they
all knew about it.
133
134 A VERY SHORT STORY
They all liked Luz. As he walked back along the halls he
thought of Luz in his bed.
Before he went back to the front they went into the Duomo
and prayed. It was dim and quiet, and there were other
beople praying. They wanted to get married, but there was
not enOtigh time for the banns, and neither of {hem had birth
certificates. They felt as though they were married, but they
wanted everyone to know about it, and to make it so they
could not lose it.
Luz wrote him many letters that he never got
until after
the armistice. Fifteen came in a bunch to the front and he
sorted them by the dates and read them all straight through.
They were all about the hospital, and how much she loved
him and how it was impossible
to get along without him and
how terrible it was missing him at night.
After the armistice they agreed he should go home to get a
job so they might be married. Luz would not come home
until he had a good job and could come to New York to meet
her. It was understood he would not drink, and he did not
want to see his friends or anyone in the States. Only to get
a job and be married. On the train from Padua to Milan
they quarrelled about her not being willing
to come home at
once. When they had to say good-bye,
in the station at Milan,
they kissed good-bye, but were not finished with the quarrel.
He felt sick about saying good-bye
like that.
He went to America on a boat from Genoa. Luz went back
to Pordonone to open
a hospital.
It was lonely and rainy
there and there was a battalion of arditi quartered
in the
town. Living in the muddy, rainy town in the winter, the
major of the battalion made love to Luz, and she had never
known Italians before, and finally wrote to the States that
theirs had been only
a boy and girl affair. She was sorry,
and she knew he would probably
not be able to understand,
but might some day forgive her, and be grateful
to her, and
she expected, absolutely unexpectedly,
to be married in the
spring. She loved him as always, but she realized now it was
AVERYSHORTSTORY 135
only a boy and girl love. She hoped he would have a great
career, and believed in him absolutely. She knew it was for
the best.
The major did not marry her in the spring, or any other
time. Luz never got an answer to the letter to Chicago abou v
it. A short tinie after he contracted gonorrhoea
froin a sales
girl in a loop department store while riding
in a taxicab
through Lincoln Park.
While the bombardment was knocking
the trench to pieces at Fossalta,
he lay very fiat and sweated and prayed ohjesus
christ get me out of
here. Dearjesusplease get me out. Christpleasepleaseplease
christ. If
you'll only keep me from getting
killed Pll do anything you say.
I
believe injou and Pll tell everyone
in the world that you are the only
one that matters. Pleaseplease dearjesus. The shelling rnovedfarther up
the line. We went to work on the trench and in the morning
the sun came
up and the day was hot and muggy
and cheerful and quiet. The next
night back at Mestre he did not tell the girl he went upstairs with at
the Villa Rossa about Jesus. And he never told anybody.
SOLDIER'S HOME
KREBS went to the war from a Methodist college
in Kansas.
There is a picture which shows him among his fraternity
brothers, all of them wearing exactly the same height and
style collar. He enlisted in the Marines in 1917 and did not
return to the United States until the second division returned
from the Rhine in the summer of 1919.
There is a picture which shows him on the Rhine with
two German girls and another corporal. Krebs and the corporal look too big
for their uniforms. The German girls are
not beautiful. The Rhine does not show in the picture.
By the time Krebs returned to his home town in Oklahoma
the greeting ofheroes was over. He came back much too late.
The men from the town who had been drafted had all been
welcomed elaborately on their return. There had been a
great deal of hysteria. Now the reaction had set in. People
seemed to think it was rather ridiculous for Krebs to be
getting back so late, years
after the war was over.
At first Krebs,t
who had been at Belleau Wood, Soissons, the
Champagne, St. Mihiel and in the Argonne, did not want to
talk about the war at all. Later he felt the need to talk but no
136
SOLDIER'S HOME 137
one wanted to hear about it. His town had heard too many
atrocity stories to be thrilled by actualities. Krebs found
that to be listened to at all he had to lie, and after he had done
this twice he, too, had a reaction against the war and agains*-
talking about it. A distaste for everything that had happened
to him in the War set in because of the lies he had told. All
of the times that had been able to make him feel cool and
clear inside himself when he thought of them; the times so
long back when he had done the one thing, the only thing for
a man to do, easily and naturally, when he might
have done
something else, now lost their cool, valuable quality and then
were lost themselves.
His lies were quite unimportant lies and consisted in
attributing to himself things other men had seen, done or
heard of, and stating
as facts certain apocryphal
incidents
familiar to all soldiers. Even his lies were not sensational at
the pool room. His acquaintances, who had heard detailed
accounts of German women found chained to machine-guns
in the Argonne forest and who could not comprehend,
or
were barred by their patriotism from interest in, any German
machine-gunners who were not chained, were not thrilled
by his stories.
Krebs acquired
the nausea in regard to experience
that is
the result of untruth or exaggeration, and when he occasionally met another man who had really been a soldier and they
talked a few minutes in the dressing room at a dance he fell
into the easy pose of the old soldier among other soldiers :
that he had been badly, sickeningly frightened
all the time.
In this way he lost everything.
During this time, it was late summer, he was sleeping
late
in bed, getting up to walk down town to the library
to get a
book, eating lunch at home, reading on the front porch
until
he became bored and then walking down through
the town
to spend the hottest hours of the day in the cool dark of the
pool room. He loved to play pool.
In the evening he practised on his clarinet, strolled down
1 38 SOLDIER'SHOME
town, read and went to bed. He was still a hero to his two
young sisters. His mother would have given him breakfast
in bed if he had wanted it. She often came in when he was
in bed and asked him to tell her about the war, but her
Attention always wandered. His father was non-committal.
Before Krebs went away to the war he had never been
allowed to drive the family motor car. His father was in the
real estate business and always wanted the car to be at his
command when he required
it to take clients out into the
country to show them a piece of farm property. The car
always stood outside the First National Bank building where
his father had an office on the second floor. Now, after the
war, it was still the same car.
Nothing was changed in the town except
that the young
girls had grown up. But they lived in such a complicated
world of already
defined alliances and shifting feuds that
Krebs did not feel the energy or the courage to break into it.
He liked to look at them, though. There were so many goodlooking young girls. Most of them had their hair cut short.
When he went away only
little girls wore their hair like that
or girls that were fast. They all wore sweaters and shirt
waists with round Dutch collars. It was a pattern. He liked
to look at them from the front porch as they walked on the
other side of the street. He liked to watch them walking
under the shade of the trees. He liked the round Dutch
collars above their sweaters. He liked their silk stockings and
flat shoes. He liked their bobbed hair and the way they
walked.
When he was in town their appeal
to him was not very
strong. He did not like them when he saw them in the
Greek's ice cream parlour. He did not want them themselves
really. They were too complicated. There was something
else. Vaguely he wanted a girl but he did not want to have to
work to get her. He would have liked to have a girl but he
did not want to have to spend
a long time getting
her. He
did not want to get
into the intrigue and the politics. He did
SOLDIER'S HOME 139
not want to have to do any courting. He did not want to tell
any more lies. It wasn't worth it.
He did not want any consequences. He did not want any
consequences ever again. He wanted to live along
without
consequences. Besides he did not really need a girl. Thft
army had taught him that. It was all right
to pose
as though
you had to have a girl. Nearly everybody did that. But it
wasn't true. You did not need a girl. That was the funny
thing. First a fellow boasted how girls meant nothing to him,
that he never thought of them, that they could not touch
him. Then a fellow boasted that he could not get along
without girls, that he had to have them all the time, that he
could not go to sleep without them.
That was all a lie. It was all a lie both ways. You did not
need a girl unless you thought about them. He learned that
in the army. Then sooner or later you always got
one. When
you were really ripe
for a girl you always got one. You did
not have to think about it. Sooner or later it would come.
He had learned that in the army.
Now he would have liked a girl
if she had come to him
and not wanted to talk. But here at home it was all too complicated. He knew he could never get through it all again.
It was not worth the trouble. That was the thing about
French girls and German girls. There was not all this talking.
You couldn't talk much and you did not need to talk. It was
simple and you were friends. He thought about France and
then he began to think about Germany. On the whole he
had liked Germany better. He did not want to leave Germany. He did not want to come home. Still, he had come
home. He sat on the front porch.
He liked the girls that were walking along the other side of
the street. He liked the look of them much better than the
French girls or the German girls. But the world they were
in was not the world he was in. He would like to have one
of them. But it was not worth it. They were such a nice
pattern. He liked the pattern.
It was exciting. But he would
i 4o SOLDIER'S HOME
not go through all the talking. He did not want one badly
enough. He liked to look at them all, though. It was not
worth it. Not now when things were getting good again.
He sat there on the porch reading
a book on the war. It
was a history and he was reading about all the engagements
he had been in. It was the most interesting reading he had
ever done. He wished there were more maps. He looked
forward with a good feeling to reading all the really good
histories when they would come out with good detail maps.
Now he was really learning about the war. He had been a
good soldier. That made a difference.
One morning after he had been home about a month his
mother came into his bedroom and sat on the bed. She
smoothed her apron.
'I had a talk with your father last night, Harold,' she said,
x and he is willing for you to take the car out in the evenings.'
'Yeah?5 said Krebs, who was not fully awake. 'Take the
car out? Yeah?'
'Yes. Your father has felt for some time that you should be
able to take the car out in the evenings whenever you wished,
but we only talked it over last night.'
Til bet you made him,' Krebs said.
'No. It was your father's suggestion that we talk the
matter over.'
'Yeah. I'll bet you made him,' Krebs sat up in bed.
'Will you come down to breakfast, Harold?' his mother said.
'As soon as I get my clothes on,' Krebs said.
His mother went out of the room and he could hear her
frying something downstairs while he washed, shaved and
dressed to go down into the dining-room for breakfast. While
he was eating breakfast his sister brought in the mail.
'Well, Hare,' she said. 'You old sleepy-head. What do you
ver get up for?'
Krebs looked at her. He liked her. She was his best sister.
'Have you got the paper?' he asked.
She handed him The Kansas City
Star and he shucked off
SOLDIER'S HOME I4 i
its brown wrapper and opened it to the sporting page. He
folded The Star open and propped it against the water pitcher
with his cereal dish to steady it, so he could read while he ate.
'Harold/ his mother stood in the kitchen doorway, 'Harol^,
please don't muss up the paper. Your father can't read his
Star if it's be'en mussed.'
'I won't muss it,' Krebs said.
His sister sat down at the table and watched him while he
read.
'We're playing indoor over at school this afternoon,' she
said. 'I'm going to pitch.'
'Good,' said Krebs. 'How's the old wing?'
'I can pitch better than lots of the boys.
I tell them all you
taught me. The other girls aren't much good.'
'Yeah?' said Krebs.
'I tell them all you're my beau. Aren't you my beau, Hare?*
'You bet.'
'Couldn't your brother really be your beau just because
he's your brother?'
'I don't know.'
'Sure you know. Couldn't you be my beau, Hare, if I was
old enough and if you wanted to?'
'Sure. You're my girl now.'
'Am I really your girl?'
'Sure.'
'Do you love me?'
'Uh, huh.'
'Will you love me always?'
'Sure.'
'Will you come over and watch me play
indoor?'
'Maybe.'
'Aw, Hare, you don't love me. If you loved me, you'd want
to come over and watch me play
indoor.'
Kreb's mother came into the dining-room from the kitchen.
She carried a plate with two fried eggs and some crisp bacon
on it and a plate of buckwheat cakes.
i 42 SOLDIER'S HOME
'You run along, Helen/ she said. 'I want to talk to Harold.'
She put the eggs and bacon down in front of him and
brought in a jug
of maple syrup
for the buckwheat cakes.
Then she sat down across the table from Krebs.
'I wish you'd put down the paper
a minute, Harold/ she
said.
Krebs took down the paper and folded it.
'Have you decided what you are going to do yet, Harold?'
his mother said, taking
off her glasses.
'No/ said Krebs.
'Don't you think it's about time?' His mother did not say
this in a mean way. She seemed worried.
'I hadn't thought about it/ Krebs said.
'God has some work for every one to do/ his mother said.
'There can be no idle hands in His Kingdom.'
'Pm not in His Kingdom/ Krebs said.
'We arc all of us in His Kingdom.'
Krebs felt embarrassed and resentful as always.
'I've worried about you so much, Harold/ his mother went
on. 'I know the temptations you must have been exposed to.
I know how weak men are. I know what your own dear
grandfather, my own father, told us about the Civil War, and
I have prayed for you.
I pray
for you all day long, Harold.'
Krebs looked at the bacon fat hardening on his plate.
'Your father is worried, too/ his mother went on. 'He
thinks you have lost your ambition, that you haven't got a
definite aim in life. Charley Simmons, who is just your age,
has a good job and is going to be married. The boys are all
settling down; they're
all determined to get somewhere; you
can see that boys like Charley Simmons are on their way to
being really a credit to the community.'
Krebs said nothing.
'Don't look that way, Harold/ his mother said. 'You
know we love you and I want to tell you for your own good
how matters stand. Your father does not want to hamper
your freedom. He thinks you should be allowed to drive the
SOLDIER'S HOME 143
car. If you want to take some of the nice girls out riding
with you, we are only too pleased. We want you to enjoy
yourself. But you are going to have to settle down to work,
Harold. Your father doesn't care what you start in at.
c
All work is honourable as he says. But you've got to -make a
start at something. He asked me to speak to you this morning
and then you can stop
in and sec him at his office.'
'Is that all?' Krcbs said.
'Yes. Don't you love your mother, dear boy?'
'No,' Krebs said.
His mother looked at him across the table. Her eyes were
shiny. She started crying.
'I don't love anybody,' Krebs said.
It wasn't any good. He couldn't tell her, he couldn't
make her see it. It was silly to have said it. He had only
hurt her. He went over and took hold of her arm. She was
crying with her head in her hands.
'I didn't mean it,' he said. 'I was just angry at something.
I didn't mean I didn't love you.'
His mother went on crying. Krebs put his arm on her
shoulder.
'Can't you believe me, mother?'
His mother shook her head.
'Please, please, mother. Please believe me.'
'All right,' his mother said chokily. She looked up at him.
'I believe you, Harold.'
Krebs kissed her hair. She put
her face up to him.
Tm your mother,' she said. 'I held you next to my heart
when you were a tiny baby.'
Krebs felt sick and vaguely nauseated.
'I know, Mummy,' he said. Til try and* be a good boy for
you.'
'Would you kneel and pray
with me, Harold?' his mother
asked.
They knelt down beside the dining-room table and Krebs's
mother prayed.
i 44 SOLDIER'S HOME
'Now, you pray, Harold/ she said.
'I can't,' Krebs said.
'Try, Harold.'
'I can't.'
'Do you want me to pray
for you?'
'Yes.'
So his mother prayed
for him and then they stood up and
Krebs kissed his mother and went out of the house. He had
tried so to keep his life from being complicated. Still, none of
it had touched him. He had felt sorry for his mother and she
had made him lie. He would go to Kansas City and get a job
and she would feel all right about it. There would be one
more scene maybe before he got away. He would not go
down to his father's office. He would miss that one. He
wanted his life to go smoothly. It had just gotten going that
way. Well, that was all over now, anyway. He would go
over to the schoolyard and watch Helen play indoor baseball.
If it happened right down close in front ofyou, you could see Villalta
snarl at the bull and curse him, and when the bull charged he swung
back firmly like an oak when the wind hits it, his legs tight together,
the muleta trailing and the swordfollowing
the curve behind. Then he
cursed the bull, flopped
the muleta at him, and swung back from the
charge, hisfeet firm,
the muleta curving, and at each swing the crowd
roaring.
When he started to kill it was all in the same rush. The bull
looking at him straight
in front, hating. He drew out the swordfrom
thefolds of the muleta and sighted with the same movement and called
to the bull, Toro! Toro! and the bull charged and Villalta charged
and just for a moment they became one. Villalta became one with
the bull and then it was over. Villalta standing straight and the
red hilt of the sword sticking out dully between the buWs shoulders.
Villalta, his hand up
at the crowd and the bull roaring blood, looking
straight at Villalta and his legs caving.
CROSS-COUNTRY SNOW
THE funicular car bucked once more and then stopped.
It
could not go farther, the snow drifted solidly across the track.
The gale scouring
the exposed surface of the mountain had
swept the snow surface into a wind-board crust. Nick,
waxing his skis in the baggage car, pushed his boots into the
toe irons and shut the clamp tight. He jumped from the car
sideways on to the hard wind-board, made a jump turn and
crouching and trailing
his sticks slipped
in a rush down the
slope.
On the white below George dipped and rose and dipped
out of sight. The rush and the sudden swoop as he dropped
down a steep undulation in the mountain side plucked
Nick's
mind out and left him only
the wonderful flying, dropping
sensation in his body. He rose to a slight up-run and then the
snow seemed to drop out from under him as he went down,
163
164 CROSS-COUNTRY SNOW
down, faster and faster in a rush down the last, long steep
slope. Crouching so he was almost sitting back on his skis,
trying to keep the centre of gravity low, the snow driving
like
a sand-storm, he knew the pace was too much. But he held
it. He would not let go and spill. Then a patch ofsoft snow,
left in a hollow by the wind, spilled him and he went over
and over in a clashing of skis, feeling
like a shot rabbit, then
stuck, his legs crossed, his skis sticking straight up
and his
nose and ears jammed full ofsnow.
George stood a little farther down the slope, knocking the
snow from his wind jacket with big slaps.
'You took a beauty, Mike,
5 he called to Nick. 'That's
lousy soft snow. It bagged me the same way.'
'What's it like over the khud?' Nick kicked his skis around
as he lay on his back and stood up.
'You've got to keep to your left. It's a good fast drop with
a Christy at the bottom on account ofa fence.'
'Wait a sec and we'll take it together.'
'No, you come on and go first. I like to see you take the
knuds.'
Nick Adams came up past George, big back and blond
head still faintly snowy, then his skis started slipping
at the
edge and he swooped down, hissing
in the crystalline powder
snow and seeming to float up
and drop down as he went up
and down the billowing khuds. He held to his left at the
end, as he rushed toward the fence, keeping
his knees
locked tight together and turning his body like tightening
a screw brought his skis sharply around to the right
in
a smother of snow and slowed into a loss of speed parallel
to
the hillside and the wire fence.
He looked up thfe hill. George was coming down in telemark position, kneeling; one leg forward and bent, the other
trailing; his sticks hanging like some insect's thin legs, kicking
up puffs of snow as they touched the surface and finally the
whole kneeling, trailing figure coming around in a beautiful
right curve, crouching, the legs shot forward and back, the
CROSS -COUNTRY SNOW 165
body leaning out against
the swing,
the sticks accenting
the
curve like points oflight,
all in a wild cloud ofsnow.
'I wns afraid to Christy,
5
George said, 'the snow was too
deep. You made a beauty.'
'I can't tclemark with my leg,
5 Nick said.
Nick held down the top
strand of the wire fence with his ski
and George slid over. Nick followed him down to the road.
They thrust bent-kneed along
the road into a pine forest.
The road became polished ice, stained orange and a tobacco
yellow from the teams hauling logs. The skiers kept
to the
stretch of snow along the side. The road dipped sharply
to
a stream and then ran straight up-hill. Through the woods
they could see a long, low-eaved, weather-beaten building.
Through the trees it was a faded yellow. Closer the window
frames were painted green. The paint was peeling. Nick
knocked his clamps
loose with one of his ski sticks and kicked
off the skis.
'We might as well carry them up here,
5 he said.
He climbed the steep road with the skis on his shoulder,
kicking his heel nails into the icy footing. He heard George
breathing and kicking
in his heels just behind him. They
stacked the skis against the side of the inn and slapped the
snow off each other
5
s trousers, stamped
their boots clean, and
went in.
Inside it was quite
dark. A big porcelain
stove shone in the
corner of the room. There was a low ceiling. Smooth
benches back of dark, wine-stained tables were along each
side of the rooms. Two Swiss sat over their pipes and two
decies of cloudy new wine next to the stove. The boys
took
off their jackets and sat against the wall on the other side of
the stove. A voice in the next room stopped singing and a
girl in a blue apron came in through the door to see what
they wanted to drink.
'A bottle of Sion,
5 Nick said. 'Is that all right, Gidge?
5
'Sure,* said George. 'You know more about wine than I
do. I like any of it.
5
166 CROSS-COUNTRY SNOW
The girl went out.
'There's nothing really can touch skiing,
is there?' Nick
said. 'The way it feels when you first drop
off on a long
nn.'
'Huh/ said George.
'It's too swell to talk about.'
The girl brought the wine in and they had trouble with the
cork. Nick finally opened it. The girl went out and they
heard her singing in German in the next room.
'Those specks ofcork in it don't matter,' said Nick.
'I wonder if she's got any cake.'
'Let's find out.'
The girl came in and Nick noticed that her apron covered
swellingly her pregnancy.
I wonder why I didn't see that
when she first came in, he thought.
'What were you singing?' he asked her.
'Opera, German opera.' She did not care to discuss the
subject. 'We have some apple
strudel if you want it.'
'She isn't so cordial, is she?' said George.
'Oh, well. She doesn't know us and she thought we were
going to kid her about her singing, maybe. She's from up
where they speak German probably and she's touchy about
being here, and then she's got that baby coming without
being married and she's touchy.'
'How do you know she isn't married?'
'No ring. Hell, no girls get married around here till they're
knocked up.'
The door came open and a gang of woodcutters from up
the road came in, stamping their boots and steaming
in the
room. The waitress brought
in three litres of new wine for
the gang and they sat at the two tables, smoking and quiet,
with their hats off, leaning back against the wall or forward
on the table. Outside the horses on the wood sledges made
an occasional sharp jangle of bells as they tossed their heads.
George and Nick were happy. They were fond of each
other. They knew they had the run back home ahead of
them.
CROSS-COUNTRY SNOW 167
'When have you got to go back to school?' Nick asked.
'To-night,' George answered. 'I've got
to get the ten-forty
from Montreux.'
T wish you could stick over and we could do the Dent du
Lys to-morrow.'
M got to gefc educated,' George said. 'Gee, Mike, don't you
wish we could just bum together? Take our skis and go on
the train to where there was good running and then go on
and put up at pubs and go right
across the Oberland and up
the Valais and all through the Engadine and just take repair
kit and extra sweaters and pyjamas
in our rucksacks and not
give a damn about school or anything.'
'Yes, and go through the Schwarzwald that way. Gee, the
swell places.'
'That's where you went fishing
last summer, isn't it?'
'Yes.'
They ate the strudel and drank the rest of the wine.
George leaned back against the wall and shut his eyes.
'Wine always makes me feel this way,' he said.
'Feel bad?' Nick asked.
'No. I feel good, but funny.'
'I know,' Nick said.
'Sure,' said George.
'Should we have another bottle?' Nick asked.
'Not for me,' George said.
They sat there, Nick leaning
his elbows on the table,
George slumped back against the wall.
'Is Helen going to have a baby?' George said, coming down
to the table from the wall.
'Yes.'
'When?'
'Late next summer.'
'Are you glad?'
'Yes. Now,'
'Will you go back to the States?'
'I guess so.'
168 CROSS-COUNTRY SNOW
'Do you want to?'
'No.'
'Does Helen?'
'No.'
George sat silent. He looked at the empty bottle and the
empty glasses.
'It's hell, isn't it?' he said.
'No. Not exactly,' Nick said.
'Why not?'
'I don't know,' Nick said.
'Will you ever go skiing together
in the States?' George
said.
'I don't know,' said Nick.
'The mountains aren't much,' George said.
'No,' said Nick. 'They're
too rocky. There's too much
timber and they're too far away.'
'Yes,' said George, 'that's the way it is in California.'
'Yes,
5 Nick said, 'that's the way it is everywhere I've ever
been.'
'Yes,' said George, 'that's the way it is.'
The Swiss got up and paid and went out.
'I wish we were Swiss,' George said.
'They've all got goitre,' said Nick.
'I don't believe it,' George said.
'Neither do I,' said Nick.
They laughed.
'Maybe we'll never go skiing again, Nick,' George said.
^We've got to,' said Nick. 'It isn't worth while if you
can't.
5
'We'll go, all right,' George said.
'We've got to,
5 Nick agreed.
'I wish we could make a promise about it,' George said.
Nick stood up. He buckled his wind jacket tight. He
leaned over George and picked up the two ski poles from
against the wall. He stuck one of the ski poles
into the
floor.
CROSS-COUNTRY SNOW 169
'There isn't any good in promising,' he said.
They opened the door and went out. It was very cold.
The snow had crusted hard. The road ran up the hill into
the pine trees.
They took down their skis from where they leaned against
the wall of the inn. Nick put on his gloves. George was
already started up the road, his skis on his shoulder. Now
they would have the run home together.
/ heard the drums coming down the street and then the fifes and the
pipes and then they came around the corner, all dancing. The street
wasfull of them. Maera saw him and then I saw him. When they
stopped the music for
the crouch he hunched down in the street with
them all and when they
started it again
he jumped up and went
dancing down the street with them. He was drunk all right.
You go down after him, said Maera, he hates me.
So I went down and caught up
with them and grabbed him while he
was crouched down waiting for the music to break loose and said,
Come on Luis. For Christ's sakeyou've got
bulls this afternoon. He
didn't listen to me, he was listening so hardfor
the music to start.
I said, Don't be a damnfool Luis. Come on back to the hotel.
Then the music started up again and hejumped up and twisted away
from me and started dancing. I grabbed his arm and he pulled
loose
and said, Oh leave me alone. You're not myfather.
I went back to the hotel and Maera was on the balcony looking
out
to see if Td be bringing him back. He went inside when he saw me
and came downstairs disgusted.
Well, I said, after
all he's just an ignorant Mexican savage.
Yes, Maera said, and who will kill his bulls after he gets a
cornada?
We, I suppose, I said.
Yes, we, said Maera. We kills the savages' bulls, and the
drunkards' bulls, and the riau-riau dancers' bulls. Yes. We kill
them. We kill them all right. Yes. Yes. Yes.
MY OLD MAN
I GUESS looking at it, now, my old man was cut out for a fat
guy, one of those regular little roly fat guys you see around,
but he sure never got that way, except
a little toward the last,
and then it wasn't his fault, he was riding over the jumps only
and he could afford to carry plenty ofweight
then. I remem170
MYOLDMAN 171
ber the way he'd pull on a rubber shirt over a couple of
jerseys and a big sweat shirt over that, and get me to run
with him in the forenoon in the hot sun. He'd have, maybe,
taken a trial trip with one of Razzo's skins early
in the morning after just getting
in from Torino at four o'clock in the
morning and 'beating it out to the stables in a cab and then
with the dew all over everything and the sun just starting
to
get going, I'd help him pull
off his boots and he'd get
into a
pair of sneakers and all these sweaters and we'd start out.
'Come on, kid,' he'd say, stepping up and down on his toes
in front of the jock's dressing-room, 'let's get moving.'
Then we'd start offjogging around the infield once, maybe,
with him ahead, running nice, and then turn out the gate and
along one of those roads with all the trees along both sides of
them that run out from San Siro. I'd go ahead of him when
we hit the road and I could run pretty good and I'd look
around and he'd be jogging easy just behind me and after a
little while I'd look around again and he'd begun to sweat.
Sweating heavy and he'd just be dogging
it along with his
eyes on my back, but when he'd catch me looking at him he'd
grin and say, 'Sweating plenty?' When my old man grinned,
nobody could help but grin
too. We'd keep right on running
out toward the mountains and then my old man would yell,
'Hey, Joe!' and I'd look back and he'd be sitting under a tree
with a towel he'd had around his waist wrapped
around his
neck.
I'd come back and sit down beside him and he'd pull a
rope out of his pocket and start skipping rope out in the sun
with the sweat pouring
off his face and him skipping rope
out in the white dust with the rope going cloppetty, cloppetty,
clop, clop, clop, and the sun hotter, and him working harder
up and down a patch of the road. Say, it was a treat to see
my old man skip rope,
too. He could whirr it fast or lop
it
slow and fancy. Say, you ought to have seerfwops look at us
sometimes, when they'd come by, going into town walking
along with big white steers hauling the cart. They sure looked
iya MYOLDMAN
as though they thought the old man was nuts. He'd start the
rope whirring till they'd stop dead still and watch him, then
give the steers a cluck and a poke with the goad and get going
again.
When I'd sit watching him working out in the hot sun I
sure felt fond of him. He sure was fun and he done his work
so hard and he'd finish up with a regular whirring that'd
drive the sweat out on his face like water and then sling the
rope at the tree and come over and sit down with me and
lean back against the tree with the towel and a sweater
wrapped around his neck.
'Sure it's hell keeping it down, Joe/ he'd say, and lean back
and shut his eyes and breathe long and deep,
e
it ain't like
when you're a kid.' Then he'd get up and before he started
to cool we'd jog along back to the stables. That's the way it
was keeping down to weight. He was worried all the time.
Most jocks can just about ride off all they want to. A jock
loses about a kilo every time he rides, but my old man was
sort of dried out and he couldn't keep down his kilos without
all that running.
I remember once at San Siro, Regoli, a little wop, that was
riding for Buzoni, came out across the paddock going
to the
bar for something cool; and flicking
his boots with his whip,
after he'd just weighed in and my old man had just weighed
in too, and came out with the saddle under his arm looking
red-faced and tired and too big for his silks and he stood there
looking at young Regoli standing up to the outdoors bar, cool
and kid-looking, and I said, 'What's the matter, Dad?' 'cause
I thought maybe Regoli had bumped him or something and
he just looked at Regoli and said, 'Oh, to hell with it', and
went on to the dressing-room.
Well, it would have been all right, maybe, if we'd stayed
in Milan and ridden at Milan and Torino, 'cause if there ever
were any easy courses, it's those two. 'Pianola, Joe/ my old
man said when he dismounted in the winning stall after what
the wops thought was a hell of steeplechase.
I asked him
MYOLDMAN 173
once. 'This course rides itself. It's the pace you're going at,
that makes riding the jumps dangerous, Joe. We ain't going
any pace here, and they ain't really bad jumps either. But
it's the pace always not the jumps that makes th^
trouble.'
San Siro wtis the swellest course I'd ever seen but the old
man said it was a dog's
life. Going back and forth between
Mirafiore and San Siro and riding just about every day in
the week with a train ride every
other night.
I was nuts about the horses, too. There's something about
it, when they come out and go up to the track to the post.
Sort of dancy and tight looking with the jock keeping
a tight
hold on them and maybe easing
off a little and letting them
run a little going up. Then once they were at the barrier it
got me worse than anything. Especially
at San Siro with that
big green infield and the mountains way off and the fat wop
starter with his big whip
and the jocks fiddling them around
and then the barrier snapping up and that bell going off and
them all getting off in a bunch and then commencing to
string out. You know the way a bunch of skins gets
off. If
you're up in the stand with a pair of glasses
all you see is
them plunging off and then that bell goes
off and it seems
like it rings for a thousand years and then they come
sweeping round the turn. There wasn't ever anything
like
it for me.
But my old man said one day,
in the dressing-room, when
he was getting into his street clothes, 'None of these things are
horses, Joe. They'd kill that bunch of skates for their hides
and hoofs up at Paris.' That was the day he'd won the
Premio Commercio with Lantorna shooting her out of the
field the last hundred metres like pulling a cork out of a
bottle.
It was right after the Premio Commercio that we pulled
out and left Italy. My old man and Holbrook and a fat wop
in a straw hat that kept wiping
his face with a handkerchief
were having an argument at a table in the Galleria. They
174 MYOLDMAN
were all talking French and the two of them was after my
old man about something. Finally he didn't say anything
any more but just
sat there and looked at Holbrook, and the
two of them kept
after him, first one talking and then the
other, and the fat wop always butting
in on Holbrook.
'You go out and buy me a Sportsman,
will you, Joe?' my
old man said, and handed me a couple
of soldi without
looking away from Holbrook.
So I went out of the Galleria and walked over to in front
of the Scala and bought a paper, and carne back and stood a
little way away because I didn't want to butt in and my old
man was sitting back in his chair looking down at his coffee
and fooling with a spoon and Holbrook and the big wop were
standing and the big wop was wiping
his face and shaking
his head. And I came up and my old man acted just
as
though the two of them weren't standing there and said,
"Want an ice, Joe?' Holbrook looked down at my old man
and said slow and careful, 'You son of a bitch,' and he and
the fat wop went out through the tables.
My old man sat there and sort of smiled at me, but his face
was white and he looked sick as hell and I was scared and
felt sick inside because I knew something had happened and
I didn't see how anybody could call rny old man a son of a
bitch, and get away with it. My old man opened up the
Sportsman and studied the handicaps
for a while, and then he
said, 'You got to take a lot of things
in this world, Joe.' And
three days later we left Milan for good on the Turin train for
Paris, after an auction sale out in front of Turner's stables of
everything we couldn't get
into a trunk and a suitcase.
We got into Paris early
in,the morning in a long, dirty
station the old man told me was the Gare de Lyon. Paris was
an awful big town after Milan. Seems like in Milan everybody is going somewhere and all the trams run somewhere
and there ain't any sort of a mix-up, but Paris is all balled
up and they never do straighten
it out. I got to like it, though,
part of it, anyway, and say,
it's got the best race courses in
MYOLDMAN 175
the world. Seems as though that were the thing
that keeps
it all going and about the only thing you can figure on is that
every day the buses will be going out to whatever track they're
running at, going right out through everything to the track.
I never really got
to know Paris well, because I just came in
about once or twice a week with the old man from Maisons
and he always sat at the Cafe de la Paix on the Opera side
with the rest of the gang from Maisons and I guess that's
one of the busiest parts of the town. But, say,
it is funny that
a big town like Paris wouldn't have a Galleria, isn't it?
Well, we went out to live at Maisons-Lafitte, where just
about everybody lives except the gang at Chantilly, with a
Mrs. Meyers that runs a boarding
house. Maisons is about the
swellest place to live I've ever seen in all my life. The town
ain't so much, but there's a lake and a swell forest that we
used to go off bumming in all day, a couple
of us kids, and my
old man made me a sling shot and we got a lot of things with
it but the best one was a magpie. Young Dick Atkinson shot
a rabbit with it one day and we put it under a tree and were
all sitting around and Dick had some cigarettes and all of a
sudden the rabbit jumped up and beat it into the brush and
we chased it but we couldn't find it. Gee, we had fun at
Maisons. Mrs. Meyers used to give me lunch in the morning
and I'd be gone all day.
I learned to talk French quick.
It's
an easy language.
As soon as we got to Maisons, my old man wrote to Milan
for his licence and he was pretty worried till it came. He used
to sit around the Cafe de Paris in Maisons with the gang,
there were lots of guys he'd known when he rode up at Paris,
before the war, lived at Maisons, and there's a lot of time to
sit around because the work around a racing stable, for the
jocks, that is, is all cleaned up by nine o'clock in the morning.
They take the first bunch of skins out to gallop them at 5.30
in the morning and they work the second lot at 8 o'clock.
That means getting up early
all right and going
to bed early,
too. If a jock's riding
for somebody too, he can't go boozing
176 MY OLD MAN
around because the trainer always has an eye on him if he's a
kid and if he ain't a kid he's always got an eye on himself.
So mostly if a jock
ain't working
he sits around the Caf6 de
Paris with the gang and they can all sit around about two or
three hours in front of some drink like a vermouth and seltz
and they talk and tell stories and shoot pool &nd it's sort of
like a club or the Galleria in Milan. Only it ain't really
like
the Galleria because there everybody is going by all the time
and there's everybody around at the tables.
Well, my old man got
his licence all right. They sent it
through to him without a word and he rode a couple
oftimes.
Amiens, up country and that sort of thing, but he didn't seem
to get any engagement. Everybody liked him and whenever
I'd come into the Cafe in the forenoon I'd find somebody
drinking with him because my old man wasn't tight
like most
of these jockies that have got
the first dollar they made riding
at the World's Fair in St. Louis in nineteen ought four. That's
what my old man would say when he'd kid George Burns.
But it seemed like everybody steered clear of giving my old
man any mounts.
We went out to wherever they were running every day
with the car from Maisons and that was the most fun of all.
I was glad when the horses came back from Deauville and
the summer. Even though it meant no more bumming in the
woods, 'cause then we'd ride to Enghien or Tremblay or St.
Cloud and watch them from the trainers' and jockeys'
stand.
I sure learned about racing from going out with that gang
and the fun of it was going every day.
I remember once out at St. Cloud. It was a big two hundred thousand franc race with seven entries and War Cloud
a big favourite. I went around to the paddock to see the
horses with my old man and you never saw such horses. This
War Cloud is a great big yellow horse that looks just
like
nothing but run. I never saw such a horse. He was being led
around the paddocks with his head down and when he went
by me I felt all hollow inside he was so beautiful. There
MYOLDMAN 177
never was such a wonderful, lean, running built horse. And
he went around the paddock putting
his feet just
so and quiet
and careful and moving easy like he knewjust what he had to
do and not jerking and standing up on his legs and getting
wild eyed like you see these selling platers with a shot of dope
in them. The 'crowd was so thick I couldn't see him again
except just his legs going by and some yellow and my old
man started out through the crowd and I followed him over
to the jocks' dressing-room back in the trees and there was a
big crowd around there, too, but the man at the door in a
derby nodded to my old man and we got
in and everybody
was sitting around and getting dressed and pulling
shirts
over their heads and pulling boots on and it all smelled
hot and sweaty and linimenty and outside was the crowd
looking in.
The old man went over and sat down beside George
Gardner that was getting
into his pants and said, 'What's
the dope, George?' just in an ordinary tone of voice, 'cause
there ain't any use him feeling around because George
either can tell him or he can't tell him.
'He won't win,' George says very low, leaning over and
buttoning the bottoms of his breeches.
'Who will?' my old man says, leaning
over close so nobody
can hear.
'Foxless,' George says, 'and if he does, save me a couple
of
tickets.'
My old man says something in a regular
voice to George
and George says, 'Don't ever bet on anything
I tell you,'
kidding like, and we beat it out and through all the crowd
that was looking in, over to the 100 franc mutuel machine.
But I knew something big was up because George is War
Cloud's jockey. On the way he gets one of the yellow
oddssheets with the starting-prices on and War Cloud is only
paying 5 for 10, Cefisidote is next at 3 to i and fifth down the
list this Foxless at 8 to i . My old man bets five thousand on
Foxless to win and puts on a thousand to place and we went
M
178 MYOLDMAN
around back of the grandstand to go up the stairs and get a
place to watch the race.
We were jammed in tight and first a man in a long
coat
with a grey tall hat and a whip folded up in his hand came
out and then one after another the horses, with the jocks up
and a stable boy holding the bridle on each side and walking
along, followed the old guy. That big yellow horse War
Cloud came first. He didn't look so big when you first looked
at him until you saw the length of his legs and the whole way
he's built and the way he moves. Gosh, I never saw such a
horse. George Gardner was riding him and they moved
along slow, back of the old guy in the grey tall hat that
walked along like he was a ring master in a circus. Back of
War Cloud, moving along smooth and yellow in the sun,
was a good looking black with a nice head with Tommy
Archibald riding him; and after the black was a string of five
more horses all moving along slow in a procession past
the
grandstand and the pesage. My old man said the black was
Fcpdess and I took a good look at him and he was a nicelooking horse, all right, but nothing like War Cloud.
Everybody cheered War Cloud when he went by and he
sure was one swell-looking
horse. The procession of them
went around on the other side past the pelouse and then
back up to the near end of the course and the circus master
had the stable boys turn them loose one after another so they
could gallop by the stands on their way up to the post and
let everybody have a good look at them. They weren't at
the post hardly any time at all when the gong started and
you could see them way off across the infield all in a bunch
starting on the first swing
like a lot of little toy
horses. I
was watching them through the glasses and War Cloud was
running well back, with one of the bays making the pace.
They swept down and around and came pounding past and
War Cloud was way back when they passed us and this
Foxless horse in front and going smooth. Gee, it's awful
when they go by you and then you have to watch them go
MYOLDMAN 179
farther away and get smaller and smaller and then all
bunched up on the turns and then come around towards
into the stretch and you feel like swearing and god-damming
worse and worse. Finally they made the last turn and came
into the straightaway with this Foxlcss horse way out in
front. Everybody was looking funny and saying 'War Cloud'
in sort of a sick way and them pounding nearer down the
stretch, and then something came out of the pack right into
my glasses like a horse-headed yellow streak and everybody
began to yell 'War Cloud' as though they were crazy. WaiCloud came on faster than I'd ever seen anything
in my life
and pulled up on Foxless that was going fast as any black
horse could go with the jock flogging
hell out of him with the
gad and they were right dead neck and neck for a second but
War Cloud seemed going about twice as fast with those great
jumps and that head out but it was while they were neck
and neck that they passed
the winning post and when the
numbers went up
in the slots the first one was 2 and that
meant that Foxless had won.
I felt all trembly and funny inside and then we were all
jammed in with the people going downstairs to stand in front
of the board where they'd post what Foxless paid. Honest,
watching the race I'd forgot how much my old man had bet
on Foxless. I'd wanted War Cloud to win so damned bad.
But now it was all over it was swell to know we had the
winner.
'Wasn't it a swell race, Dad?' I said to him.
He looked at me sort of funny with his derby on the back
of his head. 'George
Gardner's a swell jockey
all right,' he
said. 'It sure took a great jock
to keep
that War Cloud horse
from winning.'
Of course I knew it was funny all the time. But my old
man saying that right out like that sure took the kick all out
of it for me and I didn't get the real kick back again ever,
even when they posted
the numbers upon the board and the
bell rang to pay off and we saw that Foxless paid 67.50
for 10.
i8o MY OLD MAN
All round people were saying, Toor War Cloud! Poor War
Cloud!' And I thought,
I wish I were a jockey and could
have rode him instead of that son of a bitch. And that was
funny, thinking of George Gardner as a son of a bitch because I'd always liked him and besides he'd given us the
winner, but I guess that's what he is, all right.
My old man had a big
lot of money after that race and he
took to coming into Paris oftener. If they raced at Tremblay
he'd have them drop him in town on their way back to
Maisons and he and I'd sit out in front of the Cafe de la Paix
and watch the people go by.
It's funny sitting there. There's
streams of people going by and all sorts of guys come up and
want to sell you things, and I loved to sit there with my old
man. That was when we'd have the most fun. Guys would
come by selling funny rabbits that jumped if you squeezed
a
bulb and they'd come up to us and my old man would kid
with them. He could talk French just
like English and all
those kind of guys knew him 'cause you can always tell a
jockey and then we always
sat at the same table and they
got used to seeing us there. There were guys selling matrimonial papers and girls selling rubber eggs
that when you
squeezed them a rooster came out of them and one old
wormy-looking guy that went by with postcards of Paris,
showing them to everybody, and, of course, nobody ever
bought any, and then he would come back and show the
under side ofthe pack and they would all be smutty postcards
and lots of people would dig down and buy them.
Gee, I remember the funny people
that used to go by.
Girls around supper time looking
for somebody to take them
out to eat and they'd speak to my old man and he'd make
some joke at them in French and they'd pat me on the head
and go on. Once there was an American woman sitting with
her kid daughter at the next table to us and they were both
eating ices and I kept looking
at the girl and she was awfully
good looking and I smiled at her and she smiled at me but
that was all that ever came of it because I looked for her
MY OLD MAN 181
mother and her every day and I made up ways that I was
going to speak to her and I wondered if I got to know her if
her mother would let me take her out to Auteuil or Tremblay
but I never saw either of them again. Anyway, I guess
it
wouldn't have been any good, anyway, because looking back
on it I rcmeniber the way I thought out would be best to
speak to her was to say, Tardon me, but perhaps
I can give
you a winner at Enghicn to-day?' and, after all, maybe she
would have thought I was a tout instead of really trying
to
give her a winner.
We'd sit at the Cafe de la Paix, my old man and me, and
we had a big drag with the waiter because my old man drank
whisky and it cost five francs, and that meant a good tip when
the saucers were counted up. My old man was drinking more
than I'd ever seen him, but he wasn't riding
at all now and
besides he said that whisky kept his weight down. But I
noticed he was putting
it on, all right, just the same. He'd
busted away from his old gang out at Maisons and seemed
to like just sitting around on the boulevard with me. But he
was dropping money every day at the track. He'd feel sort of
doleful after the last race, if he'd lost on the day, until we'd
get to our table and he'd have his first whisky and then he'd
be fine.
He'd be reading
the Paris-Sport and he'd look over at me
and say, 'Where's your girl, Joe?'
to kid me on account I had
told him about the girl that day at the next table. And I'd get
red, but I liked being kidded about her. It gave me a good
feeling. 'Keep your eye peeled
for her, Joe,' he'd say,
'she'll
be back.'
He'd ask me questions about things and some of the things
I'd say he'd laugh. And then he'd get
started talking about
things. About riding down in Egypt,
or at St. Moritz on the
ice before my mother died, and about during the war when
they had regular races down in the south of France without
any purses, or betting or crowds or anything just
to keep the
breed up. Regular
races with the jocks riding
hell out of the
i82 MYOLDMAN
horses. Gee, I could listen to my old man talk by the hour,
especially when he'd had a couple
or so of drinks. He'd tell
me about when he was a boy in Kentucky and going coon
hunting, and the old days
in the States before everything went
on the bum there. And he'd say, 'Joe, when we've got a
decent stake, you're going back there to the States and go
to
school.'
'What've I got to go back there to go to school for when
everything's on the bum there?' I'd ask him.
'That's different,' he'd say and get the waiter over and pay
the pile of saucers and we'd get a taxi to the Gare St. Lazare
and get on the train out to Maisons.
One day at Auteuil after a selling steeplechase, my old man
bought in the winner for 30,000 francs. He had to bid a
little to get him but the stable let the horse go finally and my
old man had his permit and his colours in a week. Gee, I
felt proud when my old man was an owner. He fixed it up
for stable space with Charles Drake and cut out coming in
to Paris, and started his running and sweating
out again, and
him and I were the whole stable gang. Our horse's name was
Gilford, he was Irish bred and a nice, sweet jumper. My old
man figured that training him and riding him, himself, he
was a good investment. I was proud
of everything and I
thought Gilford was as good a horse as War Cloud. He was a
good, solid jumper,
a bay, with plenty of speed on the flat, if
you asked him for it, and he was a nice-looking horse, too.
Gee, I was fond of him. The first time he started with my
old man up, he finished third in a 2500
metre hurdle race and
when my old man got
off him, all sweating and happy in the
place stall, and went in to weigh,
I felt as proud
of him as
though it was the first race he'd ever placed
in. You see,
when a guy ain't been riding
for a long time, you can't make
yourself really believe that he has ever rode. The whole
thing was different now, 'cause down in Milan, even big
races never seemed to make any difference to my old man, if
he won he wasn't ever excited or anything, and now it was
MY OLD MAN 18^
so I couldn't hardly sleep the night
before a race and I knew
my old man was excited, too, even if he didn't show it.
Riding for yourself makes an awful difference.
Second time Gilford and my old man started, was a rainy
Sunday at Auteuil, in the Prix du Marat, a 4500 metre
steeplechase. As soon as he'd gone out I beat it up
in the
stand with the new glasses my old man had bought for me to
watch them. They started way over at the far end of the
course and there was some trouble at the barrier. Something
with goggle blinders on was making a great fuss and rearing
around and busted the barrier once, but I could see my old
man in our black jacket, with a white cross and a black cap,
sitting up on Gilford, and patting him with his hand. Then
they were off in a jump and out of sight behind the trees and
the gong going for dear life and the pari-mutuel wickets
rattling down. Gosh, I was so excited, I was afraid to look
at them, but I fixed the glasses on the place where they would
come out back of the trees and then out they came with the
old black jacket going
third and they
all sailing over the
jump like birds. Then they went out of sight again and then
they came pounding out and down the hill and all going
nice and sweet and easy and taking the fence smooth in a
bunch, and moving away from us all solid. Looked as though
you could walk across on their backs they were all so bunched
and going so smooth. Then they bellied over the big double
Bullfinch and something came down. I couldn't see who it
was, but in a minute the horse was up and galloping
free
and the field, all bunched still, sweeping around the long
left
turn into the straightaway. They jumped the stone wall and
came jammed down the stretch toward the big water-jump
right in front of the stands. I saw them coming and hollered
at my old man as he went by, and he was leading by about a
length and riding way out, and light as a monkey,
and they
were racing for the water-jump. They took off over the big
hedge of the water-jump in a pack and then there was a
crash, and two horses pulled sideways out of it, and kept on
i84 MY OLD MAN
going, and three others were piled up.
I couldn't see my old
man anywhere. One horse kneed himself up and the jock
had hold of the bridle and mounted and went slamming on
after the place money. The other horse was up and away
by himself, jerking
his head and galloping with the bridle
rein hanging and the jock staggered over to one side of the
track against the fence. Then Gilford rolled over to one side
off my old man and got up and started to run on three legs
with his front off hoof dangling and there was my old man
laying there on the grass
flat out with his face up and blood
all over the side of his head. I ran down the stand and
bumped into a jam of people and got
to the rail and a cop
grabbed me and held me and two big stretcher-bearers were
going out after my old man and around on the other side of
the course I saw three horses, strung way out, coming out of
the trees and taking
the jump.
My old man was dead when they brought him in and while
a doctor was listening to his heart with a thing plugged in
his ears, I heard a shot up the track that meant they'd killed
Gilford. I lay down beside my old man, when they carried
the stretcher into the hospital room, and hung on to the
stretcher and cried and cried, and he looked so white and
gone and so awfully dead, and I couldn't help feeling that if
my old man was dead maybe they didn't need to have shot
Gilford. His hoof might have got
well. I don't know. I
loved my old man so much.
Then a couple of guys came in and one of them patted me
on the back and then went over and looked at my old man
and then pulled a sheet off the cot and spread it over him;
and the other was telephoning
in French for them to send the
ambulance to take him out to Maisons. And I couldn't stop
crying, crying and choking,
sort of, and George Gardner
came in and sat down beside me on the floor and put his arm
around me and says, 'Come on, Joe, old boy. Get up and
'we'll go out and wait for the ambulance.'
George and I went out to the gate and I was trying
to stop
MYOLDMAN 185
bawling and George wiped off my face with his handkerchief
and we were standing back a little ways while the crowd was
going out of the gate and a couple
of guys stopped
near us
while we were waiting for the crowd to get through
the gate
and one of them was counting
a bunch of mutuel tickets and
he said, 'Weil, Butler got his,
all right.'
The other guy said,
C
I don't give a good goddam if he did,
the crook. He had it coming to him on the stuff he's pulled.'
'I'll say he had,' said the other guy, and tore the bunch of
tickets in two.
And George Gardner looked at me to see if I'd heard and
I had all right, and he said, 'Don't you listen to what those
bums said, Joe. Your old man was one swell guy.'
But I don't know. Seems like when they get
started they
don't leave a guy nothing.
Maera lay still
',
his head on his arms, his face
in the sand. Hefelt
warm and stickyfrom the bleeding. Each time hefelt
the horn coming.
Sometimes the bull only bumped him with his head. Once the horn
went all the way through him and hefelt
it go
into the sand. Someone
had the bull by the tail. They were swearing
at him andflopping
the
cape in hisface. Then the bull was gone. Some men picked Maera up
and started to run with him toward the barriers through
the gate
out
the passageway around under the grandstand
to the infirmary. They
laid Maera down on a cot and one of
the men went outfor
the doctor.
The others stood around. The doctor came running from the corral
where he had been sewing up picador
horses. He had to stop and wash
his hands. There was a great shouting going
on in the grandstand
overhead. Maera felt everything getting larger and larger and then
smaller and smaller. Then it got larger and larger and larger and
then smaller and smaller. Then everything commenced to run faster
and faster as when they speed up
on a cinematograph film. Then he
was dead.
BIG TWO-HEARTED RIVER: PART I
THE train went on up the track out of sight, around one of
the hills of burnt timber. Nick sat down on the bundle of
canvas and bedding the baggage man had pitched out of the
door of the baggage
car. There was no town, nothing but the
rails and the burned-over country. The thirteen saloons that
had lined the one street of Seney had not left a trace. The
foundations of the Mansion House hotel stuck up above the
ground. The stone was chipped and split by the fire. It was
all that was left of the town of Seney. Even the surface had
been burned off the ground.
Nick looked at the burned-over stretch of hill-side, where
he had expected to find the scattered houses of the town and
then walked down the railroad track to the bridge over the
river. The river was there. It swirled against the log spiles
1 86
BIG TWO-HEARTED RIVER: PART I 187
of the bridge. Nick looked down into the clear, brown water,
coloured from the pebbly bottom, and watched the trout
keeping themselves steady
in the current with wavering fins.
As he watched them they changed their positions by quick
angles, only to hold steady
in the fast water again. Nick
watched them a long time.
He watched them holding themselves with their noses into
the current, many trout in deep,
fast moving water, slightly
distorted as he watched far down through the glassy convex
surface of the pool,
its surface pushing and swelling smooth
against the resistance of the log-driven piles of the bridge. At,
the bottom of the pool were the big trout. Nick did not see
them at first. Then he saw them at the bottom of the pool,
big trout looking to hold themselves on the gravel bottom in
a varying mist of gravel and sand, raised in spurts by the
current.
Nick looked down into the pool from the bridge.
It was a
hot day. A kingfisher flew up the stream. It was a long time
since Nick had looked into a stream and seen trout. They
were very satisfactory. As the shadow of the kingfisher moved
up the stream, a big trout shot upstream
in a long angle, only
his shadow marking the angle, then lost his shadow as he
came through the surface of the water, caught the sun, and
then, as he went back into the stream under the surface,
his
shadow seemed to float down the stream with the current,
unresisting, to his post under the bridge where he tightened
facing up into the current.
Nick's heart tightened
as the trout moved. He felt all the
old feeling.
He turned and looked down the stream. It stretched away,
pebbly-bottomed with shallows and big boulders and a deep
pool as it curved away around the foot of a bluff.
Nick walked back up the ties to where his pack lay
in the
cinders beside the railway
track. He was happy. He adjusted the pack harness around the bundle, pulling straps
tight, slung the pack on his back, got
his arms through
the
i88 BIG TWO-HEARTED RIVER: PART I
shoulder straps and took some of the pull
off his shoulders
by leaning his forehead against the wide band of the tumpline. Still, it was too heavy. It was much too heavy. He
had his leather rod-case in his hand and leaning forward to
keep the weight of the pack high on his shoulders he walked
along the road that paralleled the railway track, leaving the
burned town behind in the heat, and then turned off around
a hill with a high,
fire-scarred hill on either side on to a road
that went back into the country. He walked along the road
feeling the ache from the pull of the heavy pack. The road
climbed steadily.
It was hard work walking up-hill. His
muscles ached and the day was hot, but Nick felt happy.
He felt he had left everything behind, the need for thinking,
the need to write, other needs. It was all back of him.
From the time he had gotten down off the train and the
baggage man had thrown his pack
out of the open
car door
things had been different. Seney was burned, the country
was burned over and changed, but it did not matter. It
could not all be burned. He knew that. He hiked along the
road, sweating in the sun, climbing to cross the range of hills
that separated the railway from the pine plains.
The road ran on, dipping occasionally, but always
climbing. Nick went on up. Finally the road after going parallel
to the burnt hill-side reached the top. Nick leaned back
against a stump and slipped out of the pack harness. Ahead
ofhim, as far as he could see, was the pine plain. The burned
country stopped off at the left with the range of hills. On
ahead islands of dark pine
trees rose out of the plain. Far off
to the left was the line of the river. Nick fallowed it with his
eye and caught glints of the water in the sun.
There was nothing but the pine plain ahead of him, until
the far blue hills that marked the Lake Superior height of
land. He could hardly see them, faint and far away in the
heat-light over the plain. If he looked too steadily they were
gone. But if he only half-looked they were there, the far-off
hills of the height of land.
BIG TWO-HEARTED RIVER: PART I 189
Nick sat down against the charred stump and smoked a
cigarette. His pack balanced on the top ofthe stump,
harness
holding ready, a hollow moulded in it from his back. Nick
sat smoking, looking out over the country. He did not need
to get his map out. He knew where he was from the position
of the river.
As he smoked, his legs stretched out in front of him, he
noticed a grasshopper walk along the ground and up on to
his woollen sock. The grasshopper was black. As he had
walked along the road, climbing, he had started many grasshoppers from the dust. They were all black. They were not
the big grasshoppers with yellow and black or red and black
wings whirring out from their black wing sheathing as they
fly up. These were just ordinary hoppers, but all a sooty
black in colour. Nick had wondered about them as he
walked, without really thinking about them. Now, as he
watched the black hopper
that was nibbling
at the wool of
his sock with its fourway lip, he realized that they had all
turned black from living in the burned-over land. He
realized that the fire must have come the year before, but the
grasshoppers were all black now. He wondered how long
they would stay that way.
Carefully he reached his hand down and took hold of the
hopper by the wings. He turned him up,
all his legs walking
in the air, and looked at his jointed belly. Yes, it was black
too, iridescent where the back and head were dusty.
'Go on, hopper/ Nick said, speaking out loud for the first
time. Tly away somewhere.'
He tossed the grasshopper up into the air and watched him
sail away to a charcoal stump across the road.
Nick stood up. He leaned his back against the weight
of
his pack where it rested upright on the stump and got
his
arms through the shoulder straps. He stood with the pack
on his back on the brow of the hill looking out across the
country toward the distant river and then struck down the
hill-side away from the road. Underfoot the ground was good
190 BIG TWO-HEARTED RIVER: PART I
walking. Two hundred yards down the hill-side the fire line
stopped. Then it was sweet fern, growing
ankle high,
to
walk through, and clumps of jack pines; a long undulating
country with frequent
rises and descents, sandy underfoot
and the country alive again.
Nick kept his direction by the sun. He knew where he
wanted to strike the river and he kept on through the pine
plain, mounting small rises to see other rises ahead of him
and sometimes from the top of a rise a great
solid island of
pines off to his right or his left. He broke off some sprigs of
the heathery sweet fern, and put them under his pack straps.
The chafing crushed it and he smellcd it as he walked.
He was tired and very hot, walking across the uneven,
shadelcss pine plain. At any time he knew he would strike
the river by turning off to his left. It could not be more than
a mile away. But he kept on toward the north to hit the
river as far upstream as he could go in one day's walking.
For some time as he walked Nick had been in sight of one
of the big islands of pine standing out above the rolling high
ground he was crossing. He dipped down and then as he
came slowly up to the crest of the ridge he turned and made
toward the pine trees.
There was no underbrush in the island of pine
trees The
trunks of the trees went straight up or slanted toward each
other. The trunks were straight and brown without branches.
The branches were high above. Some interlocked to make a
solid shadow on the brown forest floor. Around the grove
of
trees was a bare space.
It was brown and soft underfoot as
Nick walked on it. This was the over-lapping of the pine
needle floor, extending out beyond the width of the high
branches. The trees had grown tall and the branches moved
high, leaving in the sun this bare space they had once
covered with shadow. Sharp at the edge
of this extension
of the forest floor commenced the sweet fern.
Nick slipped off his pack and lay down in the shade. He
lay on his back and looked up into the pine
trees. His neck
BIG TWO-HEARTED RIVER: PART I 19!
and back and the small of his back rested as he stretched.
The earth felt good against
his back. He looked up at the
sky, through the branches, and then shut his eyes. He
opened them and looked up again. There was a wind high
up in the branches. He shut his eyes again and went to
sleep.
Nick woke stiff and cramped. The sun was nearly down.
His pack was heavy and the straps painful
as he lifted it on.
He leaned over with the pack on and picked up the leather
rod-case and started out from the pine
trees across the sweet
fern swale, toward the river. He knew it could not be more
than a mile.
He came down a hill-side covered with stumps
into a
meadow. At the edge of the meadow flowed the river. Nick
was glad to get to the river. He walked upstream through
the meadow. His trousers were soaked with the dew as he
walked. After the hot day,
the dew had come quickly and
heavily. The river made no sound. It was too fast and
smooth. At the edge of the meadow, before he mounted to
a piece of high ground to make camp, Nick looked down the
river at the trout rising. They were rising
to insects come
from the swamp on the other side of the stream when the sun
went down. The trout jumped out of water to take them.
While Nick walked through
the little stretch of meadow
alongside the stream, trout had jumped high out of water.
Now as he looked down the river, the insects must be settling
on the surface, for the trout were feeding steadily
all down
the stream. As far down the long stretch as he could see,
the trout were rising, making circles all down the surface of
the water, as though it were starting
to rain.
The ground rose, wooded and sandy,
to overlook the
meadow, the stretch of river and the swamp.
Nick dropped
his pack and rod-case and looked for a level piece of ground.
He was very hungry and he wanted to make his camp before
he cooked. Between two jack-pines, the ground was quite
level. He took the axe out of the pack and chopped
out two
192 BIG TWO-HEARTED RIVER: PART I
projecting roots. That levelled a piece of ground large
enough to sleep on. He smoothed out the sandy soil with his
hand and pulled all the sweet fern bushes by their roots. His
hands smelled good from the sweet fern. He smoothed the
uprooted earth. He did not want anything making lumps
under the blankets. When he had the ground smooth, he
spread his three blankets. One he folded double, next to the
ground. The other two he spread on top.
With the axe he slit off a bright slab ofpine from one ofthe
stumps and split it into pegs for the tent. He wanted them
long and solid to hold in the ground. With the tent unpacked
and spread on the ground, the pack, leaning against a jackpine, looked much smaller. Nick tied the rope
that served the
tent for a ridge-pole
to the trunk of one of the pine
trees and
pulled the tent up off the ground with the other end of the
rope and tied it to the other pine. The tent hung on the rope
like a canvas blanket on a clothes line. Nick poked
a pole
he had cut up under the back peak
of the canvas and then
made it a tent by pegging out the sides. He pegged the sides
out taut and drove the pegs deep, hitting them down into
the ground with the flat of the axe until the rope loops were
buried and the canvas was drum tight.
Across the open mouth of the tent Nick fixed cheesecloth
to keep out mosquitoes. He crawled inside under the mosquito bar with various things from the pack to put
at the
head of the bed under the slant of the canvas. Inside the tent
the light came through the brown canvas. It smelled pleasantly of canvas. Already there was something mysterious
and home-like. Nick was happy as he crawled inside the tent.
He had not been unhappy all day. This was different though.
Now things were done. There had been this to do. Now it
was done. It had been a hard trip. He was very
tired. That
was done. He had made his camp. He was settled. Nothing
could touch him. It was a good place
to camp. He was there,
in the good place. He was in his home where he had made
it. Now he was hungry.
BIG TWO- HEARTED RIVER: PART I 193
He came out, crawling under the cheesecloth. It was
quite dark outside. It was lighter in the tent.
Nick went over to the pack and found, with his fingers, a
long nail in a paper
sack of nails, in the bottom of the pack*
He drove it into the pine tree, holding
it close and hitting
it
gently with the flat of the axe. He hung the pack up on the
nail. All his supplies were in the pack. They were off the
ground and sheltered now.
Nick was hungry. He did not believe he had ever been
hungrier. He opened and emptied
a can of pork and beans
and a can of spaghetti
into the frying-pan.
'I've got a right
to eat this kind of stuff,
if I'm willing to
carry it,' Nick said. His voice sounded strange
in the darkening woods. He did not speak again.
He started a fire with some chunks of pine he got with the
axe from a stump. Over the fire he stuck a wire grill, pushing the four legs down into the ground with his boot. Nick
put the frying-pan on the grill over the flames. He was
hungrier. The beans and spaghetti warmed. Nick stirred
them and mixed them together. They began to bubble,
making little bubbles that rose with difficulty to the surface.
There was a good smell. Nick got out a bottle of tomato
catchup and cut four slices of bread. The little bubbles
were coming faster now, Nick sat down beside the fire and
lifted the frying-pan
off. He poured about half the contents
out into the tin plate.
It spread slowly on the plate. Nick
knew it was too hot. He poured on some tomato catchup.
He knew the beans and spaghetti were still too hot. He
looked at the fire, then at the tent, he was not going
to spoil
it all by burning his tongue. For years he had never enjoyed
fried bananas because he had never been able to wait for
them to cool. His tongue was very sensitive. He was very
hungry. Across the river in the swamp, in the almost dark,
he saw a mist rising. He looked at the tent once more. All
right. He took a full spoonful from the plate.
'Chrise,' Nick said. 'Geezus Chrise,' he said happily.
194 BIG TWO-HEARTED RIVER: PART I
He ate the whole plateful before he remembered the bread.
Nick finished the second plateful with the bread, mopping
the plate shiny. He had not eaten since a cup of coffee and
a ham sandwich in the station restaurant at St. Ignace. It
had been a very fine experience. He had been that hungry
before, but had not been able to satisfy
it. He could have
made camp hours before if he had wanted to. There were
plenty of good places
to camp on the river. But this was
good.
Nick tucked two big chips of pine under the grill. The fire
flared up. He had forgotten
to get water for the coffee. Out
of the pack he got
a folding canvas bucket and walked down
the hill, across the edge of the meadow, to the stream. The
other bank was in the white mist. The grass was wet and
cold as he knelt on the bank and dipped
the canvas bucket
into the stream. It bellied and pulled hard in the current.
The water was ice cold. Nick rinsed the bucket and carried
it full up to the camp. Up away from the stream it was not
so cold.
Nick drove another big
nail and hung up the bucket full
of water. He dipped
the coffee pot
half full, put some more
chips under the grill on to the fire and put
the pot
on. He
could not remember which way he made coffee. He could
remember an argument about it with Hopkins,
but not which
side he had taken. He decided to bring it to a boil. He
remembered now that was Hopkins's way. He had once
argued about everything with Hopkins. While he waited
for the coffee to boil, he opened a small can of apricots. He
liked to open cans. He emptied
the can of apricots out into a
tin cup. While he watched the coffee on the fire, he drank
the juice syrup of the apricots, carefully
at first to keep from
spilling, then meditatively, sucking
the apricots down. They
were better than fresh apricots.
The coffee boiled as he watched. The lid came up
and
coffee and grounds ran down the side of the pot. Nick took
it off the grill. It was a triumph for Hopkins. He put sugar
BIG TWO- HEARTED RIVER: PART I 195
in the empty apricot cup and poured some of the coffee out
to cool. It was too hot to pour and he used his hat to hold
the handle of the coffee pot. He would not let it steep
in the
pot at all. Not the first cup.
It should be straight Hopkins
all the way. Hop deserved that. He was a very
serious coffee
drinker. He \^as the most serious man Nick had ever known.
Not heavy, serious. That was a long
time ago. Hopkins
spoke without moving his lips. He had played polo. He
made millions of dollars in Texas. He had borrowed car
fare to go to Chicago, when the wire came that his first big
well had come in. He could have wired for money. That
would have been too slow. They called Hop's girl the Blonde
Venus. Hop did not mind because she was not his real girl.
Hopkins said very confidently that none ofthem would make
fun of his real girl. He was right. Hopkins went away when
the telegram came. That was on the Black River. It took
eight days for the telegram to reach him. Hopkins gave
away his .22 calibre Colt automatic pistol to Nick. He gave
his camera to Bill. It was to remember him always by. They
were all going fishing again next summer. The Hop Head
was rich. He would get a yacht and they would all cruise
along the north shore of Lake Superior. He was excited
but serious. They said good-bye and all felt bad. It broke up
the trip. They never saw Hopkins again. That was a long
time ago on the Black River.
Nick drank the coffee, the coffee according
to Hopkins.
The coffee was bitter. Nick laughed. It made a good ending
to the story. His mind was starting
to work. He knew he
could choke it because he was tired enough. He spilled the
coffee out of the pot and shook the grounds loose into the
fire. He lit a cigarette and went inside the tent. He took off
his shoes and trousers, sitting on the blankets, rolled the
shoes up inside the trousers for a pillow and got
in between
the blankets.
Out through the front of the tent he watched the glow of
the fire, when the night wind blew on it. It was a quiet
i g6 BIG TWO-HEARTED RIVER: PART I
night. The swamp was perfectly quiet. Nick stretched
under the blanket comfortably. A mosquito hummed close
to his ear. Nick sat up and lit a match. The mosquito was on
the canvas, over his head. Nick moved the match quickly up
to it. The mosquito made a satisfactory
hiss in the flame. The
match went out. Nick lay down again unddr the blanket.
He turned on his side and shut his eyes. He was sleepy. He
felt sleep coming. He curled up under the blanket and went
to sleep.
They hanged Sam Cardinella at six o'clock in the morning
in the
corridor of the county jail. The corridor was high and narrow with
tiers of cells on either side. All the cells were occupied. The men
had been brought in for
the hanging. Five men sentenced to be
hanged were in the five top
cells. Three of
the men to be hanged
were
negroes. They were very frightened. One ofthe white men sat on his
cot with his head in his hands. The other lay flat on his cot with a
blanket wrapped around his head.
They came out on to the gallows through a door in the wall.
There were seven of them including two priests. They were carrying
Sam Cardinella. He had been like that since about four
o'clock in
the morning.
While they were strapping
his legs together two guards
held him
up and the two priests were whispering
to him. 'Be a man, my son,
said one priest. When they came toward him with the cap
to go
over
his head Sam Cardinella lost control of
his sphincter muscle. The
guards who had been holding him up
both dropped
him. They were
both disgusted. 'How about a chair, WillT asked one of
the guards.
'Better get one? said a man in a derby
hat.
When they all stepped back on the scaffolding back of
the drop,
which was very heavy,
built of
oak and steel and swung on ball
bearings, Sam Cardinella was left sitting there strapped tight, the
younger of the two priests kneeling
beside the chair. The priest
skipped back on to the scaffolding, just before
the drop fell.
BIG TWO-HEARTED RIVER: PART II
IN the morning the sun was up and the tent was starting
to
get hot. Nick crawled out under the mosquito netting
stretched across the mouth of the tent, to look at the morning.
The grass was wet on his hands as he came out. He held his
trousers and his shoes in his hands. The sun was just up over
the hill. There was the meadow, the river and the swamp.
197
ig8 BIG TWO-HEARTED RIVER: PART II
There were birch trees in the green
of the swamp on the
other side of the river.
The river was clear and smoothly fast in the early morning.
Down about two hundred yards were three logs
all the way
across the stream. They made the water smooth and deep
above them. As Nick watched, a mink crossed the river on
the logs and went into the swamp. Nick was excited. He
was excited by the early morning and the river. He was
really too hurried to eat breakfast, but he knew he must. He
built a little fire and put on the coffee pot.
While the water was heating
in the pot he took an empty
bottle and went down over the edge of the high ground to
the meadow. The meadow was wet with dew and Nick
wanted to catch grasshoppers
for bait before the sun dried
the grass. He found plenty
of good grasshoppers. They
were at the base of the grass stems. Sometimes they clung
to a grass stem. They were cold and wet with the dew, and
could not jump until the sun warmed them. Nick picked
them up, taking only
the medium-sized brown ones, and
put them into the bottle. He turned over a log and just
under the shelter of the edge were several hundred hoppers.
It was a grasshopper lodging
house. Nick put about fifty
of the medium browns into the bottle. While he was picking
up the hoppers the others warmed in the sun and commenced to hop away. They flew when they hopped. At
first they made one flight and stayed stiff when they landed,
as though they were dead.
Nick knew that by the time he was through with breakfast
they would be as lively as ever. Without dew in the grass
it
would take him all day to catch a bottle full of good grasshoppers and he would have to crush many ofthem, slamming
at them with his hat. He washed his hands at the stream. He
was excited to be near it. Then he walked up to the tent.
The hoppers were already jumping stiffly in the grass. In
the bottle, warmed by th6 sun, they were jumping in a mass.
Nick put in a pine
stick as a cork. It plugged
the mouth of
BIG TWO-HEARTED RIVER: PART II 199
the bottle enough, so the hoppers could not get out and left
plenty of air passage.
He had rolled the log back and knew he could get grasshoppers there every morning.
Nick laid the bottle full ofjumping grasshoppers against a
pine trunk. Rapidly
he mixed some buckwheat flour with
water and stirred it smooth, one cup
of flour, one cup of
water. He put a handful of coffee in the pot and dipped a
lump of grease out of a can and slid it sputtering across the
hot skillet. On the smoking skillet he poured smoothly the
buckwheat batter. It spread
like lava, the grease spitting
sharply. Around the edges the buckwheat cake began to
firm, then brown, then crisp. The surface was bubbling
slowly to porousness. Nick pushed
under the browned under
surface with a fresh pine chip. He shook the skillet sideways
and the cake was loose on the surface. I won't try and flop
it, he thought. He slid the chip of clean wood all the way
under the cake, and flopped
it over on to its face. It sputtered
in the pan.
When it was cooked Nick regreased the skillet. He used all
the batter. It made another big flapjack and one smaller one.
Nick ate a big flapjack and a smaller one, covered with
apple butter. He put apple
butter on the third cake, folded
it over twice, wrapped it in oiled paper and put
it in his shirt
pocket. He put the apple
butter jar back in the pack and
cut bread for two sandwiches.
In the pack he found a big onion. He sliced it in two and
peeled the silky outer skin. Then he cut one half into slices
and made onion sandwiches. He wrapped them in oiled
paper and buttoned them in the other pocket
of his khaki
shirt. He turned the skillet upside down on the grill, drank
the coffee, sweetened and yellow brown with the condensed
milk in it, and tidied up the camp. It was a good camp.
Nick took his fly rod out of the leather rod-case, jointed it,
and shoved the rod-case back into the tent. He put on the
reel and threaded the line through
the guides. He had to
200 BIG TWO -HEARTED RIVER: PART II
hold it from hand to hand, as he threaded it, or it would
slip back through its own weight.
It was a heavy, double
tapered fly line. Nick had paid eight
dollars for it a long
time ago. It was made heavy to lift back in the air and
come forward flat and heavy and straight
to make it possible
to cast a fly which has no weight. Nick operied
the aluminium leader box. The leaders were coiled between the damp
flannel pads. Nick had wet the pads at the water cooler on
the train up to St. Ignace. In the damp pads
the gut leaders
had softened and Nick unrolled one and tied it by a loop
at the end to the heavy fly line. He fastened a hook on the
end of the leader. It was a small hook; very thin and
springy.
Nick took it from his hook book, sitting with the rod across
his lap. He tested the knot and the spring of the rod by
pulling the line taut. It was a good feeling. He was careful
not to let the hook bite into his finger.
He started down to the stream, holding his rod, the bottle
of grasshoppers hung from his neck by a thong tied in half
hitches around the neck of the bottle. His landing net hung
by a hook from his belt. Over his shoulder was a long flour
sack tied at each corner into an car. The cord went over his
shoulder. The sack flapped against
his legs.
Nick felt awkward and professionally happy with all his
equipment hanging from him. The grasshopper
bottle swung
against his chest. In his shirt the breast pockets bulged
against him with the lunch and his fly book.
He stepped into the stream. It was a shock. His trousers
clung tight to his legs. His shoes felt the gravel. The water
was a rising cold shock.
Rushing, the current sucked against
his legs. Where he
stepped in, the water was over his knees. He waded with the
current. The gravel slid under his shoes. He looked down at
the swirl of water below each leg and tipped up the bottle
to get a grasshopper.
The first grasshopper gave
a jump in the neck of the bottle
BIG TWO- HEARTED RIVER: PART II 201
and went out into the water. He was sucked under in the
whirl by Nick's right leg and came to the surface a little way
downstream. He floated rapidly, kicking. In a quick circle,
breaking the smooth surface of the water, he disappeared. A
trout had taken him.
Another hopper poked his face out of the bottle. His
antennae wavered. He was getting
his front legs out of the
bottle to jump. Nick took him by the head and held him
while he threaded the slim hook under his chin, down
through his thorax and into the last segments of his abdomen.
The grasshopper
took hold of the hook with his front feet,
spitting tobacco juice on it. Nick dropped him into the
water.
Holding the rod in his right hand he let out line against
the pull of the grasshopper
in the current. He stripped
off
line from the reel with his left hand and let it run free. He
could see the hopper
in the little waves of the current. It
went out of sight.
There was a tug on the line. Nick pulled against the taut
line. It was his first strike. Holding the now living rod
across the current, he brought
in the line with his left hand.
The rod bent in jerks, the trout pumping against the current.
Nick knew it was a small one. He lifted the rod straight up
in the air. It bowed with the pull.
He saw the trout in the water jerking with his head and
body against the shifting tangent
of the line in the stream.
Nick took the line in his left hand and pulled the trout,
thumping tiredly against the current, to the surface. His
back was mottled the clear, water-over-gravel colour, his
side flashing in the sun. The rod under his right arm, Nick
stooped, dipping his right hand into the current. He held
the trout, never still, with his moist right hand, while he
unhooked the barb from his mouth, then dropped him back
into the stream.
He hung unsteadily
in the current, then settled to the
bottom beside a stone. Nick reached down his hand to touch
202 BIG TWO- HEARTED RIVE-R: PART II
him, his arm to the elbow under water. The trout was steady
in the moving stream, resting on the gravel, beside a stone.
As Nick's fingers touched him, touched his smooth, cool,
underwater feeling he was gone, gone in a shadow across
the bottom of the stream.
He's all right, Nick thought. He was only tired.
He had wet his hand before he touched the trout, so he
would not disturb the delicate mucus that covered him. If a
trout was touched with a dry hand, a white fungus
attacked
the unprotected spot. Years before when he had fished
crowded streams, with fly fishermen ahead ofhim and behind
him, Nick had again and again come on dead trout, furry
with white fungus,
drifted against a rock, or floating belly up
in some pool. Nick did not like to fish with other men on the
river. Unless they were of your party, they spoiled
it.
He wallowed down the stream, above his knees in the
current, through the fifty yards of shallow water above the
pile of logs that crossed the stream. He did not rebait his
hook and held it in his hand as he waded. He was certain he
could catch small trout in the shallows, but Jie did not want
them. There would be no big trout in the shallows this time
of day.
Now the water deepened up his thighs sharply and coldly.
Ahead was the smooth dammed-back flood of water above
the logs. The water was smooth and dark; on the left, the
lower edge of the meadow; on the right the swamp.
Nick leaned back against the current and took a hopper
from the bottle. He threaded the hopper on the hook and
spat on him for good luck. Then he pulled
several yards of
line from the reel and tossed the hopper out ahead on to the
fast, dark water. It floated down towards the logs, then the
weight of the line pulled
the bait under the surface. Nick
held the rod in his right hand, letting the line run out through
his fingers.
There was a long tug. Nick struck and the rod came alive
and dangerous, bent double, the line tightening, coming
BIG TWO-HEARTED RIVER: PART II 203
out of water, tightening,
all in a heavy, dangerous, steady
pull. Nick felt the moment when the leader would break if
the strain increased and let the line go.
The reel racheted into a mechanical shriek as the line
went out in a rush. Too fast. Nick could not check it, the
line rushing out, the reel note rising
as the line ran out.
With the core of the reel showing, his heart feeling stopped
with the excitement, leaning back against the current that
mounted icily his thighs. Nick thumbed the reel hard with
his left hand. It was awkward getting
his thumb inside the
fly reel frame.
As he put on pressure the line tightened
into sudden hardness and beyond the logs a huge trout went high
out of water.
As he jumped, Nick lowered the tip of the rod. But he felt, as
he dropped the tip to ease the strain, the moment when the
strain was too great; the hardness too tight. Of course, the
leader had broken. There was no mistaking
the feeling when
all spring left the line and it became dry and hard. Then it
went slack.
His mouth dry,
his heart down, Nick reeled in. He had
never seen so big a trout. There was a heaviness, a power
not to be held, and then the bulk of him, as he jumped. He
looked as broad as a salmon.
Nick's hand was shaky. He reeled in slowly. The thrill
had been too much. He felt, vaguely,
a little sick, as though
it would be better to sit down.
The leader had broken where the hook was tied to it.
Nick took it in his hand. He thought of the trout somewhere
on the bottom, holding
himself steady over the gravel,
far
down below the light, under the logs, with the hook in his jaw.
Nick knew the trout's teeth would cut through the snell of the
hook. The hook would imbed itself in his jaw. He'd bet the
trout was angry. Anything that size would be angry. That
was a trout. He had been solidly hooked. Solid as a rock.
He felt like a rock, too, before he started off. By God, he was
a big one. By God, he was the biggest one I ever heard of.
204 BIG TWO-HEARTED RIVER: PART II
Nick climbed out on to the meadow and stood, water running down his trousers and out ofhis shoes, his shoes squelchy.
He went over and sat on the logs. He did not want to rush
his sensations any.
He wriggled his toes in the water, in his shoes, and got out
a cigarette from his breast pocket. He lit it and tossed the
match into the fast water below the logs. A tiny trout rose
at the match, as it swung around in the fast current. Nick
laughed. He would finish the cigarette.
He sat on the logs, smoking, drying in the sun, the sun
warm on his back, the river shallow ahead entering
the woods,
curving into the woods, shallows, light glittering, big watersmooth rocks, cedars along
the bank and white birches, the
logs warm in the sun, smooth to sit on, without bark, grey to
the touch; slowly
the feeling of disappointment
left him. It
went away slowly, the feeling of disappointment that came
sharply after the thrill that made his shoulders ache. It was
all right now. His rod lying out on the logs, Nick tied a new
hook on the leader, pulling
the gut tight
until it grimped
into itself in a hard knot.
He baited up, then picked up the rod and walked to the
far end of the logs to get
into the water, where it was not too
deep. Under and beyond the logs was a deep pool. Nick
walked around the shallow shelf near the swamp shore until
he came out on the shallow bed of the stream.
On the left, where the meadow ended and the woods
began, a great elm tree was uprooted. Gone over in a storm,
it lay back into the woods, its roots clotted with dirt, grass
growing in them, rising a solid bank beside the stream. The
river cut to the edge of the uprooted tree. From where Nick
stood he could see deep channels, like ruts, cut in the shallow
bed of the stream by the flow of the current. Pebbly where
he stood and pebbly and full of boulders beyond; where it
curved near the tree roots, the bed of the stream was marly
and between the ruts of deep
water green weed fronds swung
in the current.
BIG TWO-HEARTED RIVER: PART II 205
Nick swung the rod back over his shoulder and forward,
and the line, curving forward, laid the grasshopper down on
one of the deep channels in the weeds. A trout struck and
Nick hooked him.
Holding the rod far out toward the uprooted tree and
sloshing backward in the current, Nick worked the trout,
plunging, the rod bending alive, out of the danger of the
weeds into the open river. Holding the rod, pumping alive
against the current, Nick brought the trout in. He rushed,
but always came, the spring of the rod yielding
to the rushes,
sometimes jerking under water, but always bringing him in.
Nick eased downstream with the rushes. The rod above his
head he led the trout over the net, then lifted.
The trout hung heavy in the net, mottled trout back and
silver sides in the meshes. Nick unhooked him; heavy sides,
good to hold, big undershot jaw, and slipped him, heaving
and big sliding, into the long sack that hung from his
shoulders in the water.
Nick spread the mouth of the sack against the current and
it filled, heavy with water. He held it up,
the bottom in the
stream, and the water poured out through the sides. Inside
at the bottom was the big trout, alive in the water.
Nick moved downstream. The sack out ahead of him sunk
heavy in the water, pulling from his shoulders.
It was getting hot, the sun hot on the back of his neck.
Nick had one good trout. He did not care about getting
many trout. Now the stream was shallow and wide. There
were trees along both banks. The trees of the left bank made
short shadows on the current in the forenoon sun. Nick knew
there were trout in each shadow. In the afternoon, after the
sun had crossed toward the hills, the trout would be in the
cool shadows on the other side of the stream.
The very biggest ones would lie up close to the bank. You
could always pick them up there on the Black. When the
sun was down they
all moved out into the current. Just when
the sun made the water blinding
in the glare before it went
ao6 BIG TWO-HEARTED RIVER: PART II
down, you were liable to strike a big
trout anywhere in the
current. It was almost impossible
to fish then, the surface of
the water was blinding
as a mirror in the sun. Ofcourse, you
could fish upstream, but in a stream like the Black, or this,
you had to wallow against the current and in a deep place,
the water piled up on you.
It was no fun tot fish upstream
with this much current.
Nick moved along through the shallow stretch watching
the banks for deep holes. A beech tree grew close beside the
river, so that the branches hung down into the water. The
stream went back in under the leaves. There were always
trout in a place like that.
Nick did not care about fishing that hole. He was sure he
would get hooked in the branches.
It looked deep though. He dropped the grasshopper
so the
current took it under water, back in under the overhanging
branch. The line pulled hard and Nick struck. The trout
threshed heavily, half out ofwater in the leaves and branches.
The line was caught. Nick pulled hard and the trout was off.
He reeled in and holding the hook in his hand, walked down
the stream.
Ahead, close to the left bank, was a big log. Nick saw it
was hollow; pointing up river the current entered it smoothly,
only a little ripple spread each side of the log. The water was
deepening. The top of the hollow log was grey and dry.
It
was partly in the shadow.
Nick took the cork out of the grasshopper bottle and a
hopper clung to it. He picked him off, hooked him and tossed
him out. He held the rod far out so that the hopper on the
water moved into the current flowing into the hollow log.
Nick lowered the rod and the hopper floated in. There was a
heavy strike. Nick swung the rod against the pull.
It felt as
though he were hooked into the log itself, except
for the live
feeling.
He tried to force the fish out into the current. It came,
heavily.
BIG TWO- HEAR TED RIVER: PART II 207
The line went slack, and Nick thought the trout was gone.
Then he saw him, very near, in the current, shaking
his head,
trying to get the hook out. His mouth was clamped shut.
He was fighting the hook in the clear flowing
current.
Looping in the line with his left hand, Nick swung the rod
to make the line taut and tried to lead the trout toward the
net, but he was gone, out of sight, the line pumping. Nick
fought him against the current, letting him thump in the
water against the spring of the rod. He shifted the rod to his
left hand, worked the trout upstream, holding his weight,
fighting on the rod, and then let him down into the net. He
lifted him clear of the water, a heavy half circle in the net,
the net dripping, unhooked him and slid him into the sack.
He spread the mouth of the sack and looked down in at
the two big trout alive in the water.
Through the deepening water, Nick waded over to the
hollow log. He took the sack off, over his head, the trout
flopping as it came out of water, and hung it so the trout
were deep in the water. Then he pulled himself up on the
log and sat, the water from his trousers and boots running
down into the stream. He laid his rod down, moved along
to
the shady end of the log and took the sandwiches out of his
pocket. He dipped the sandwiches in the cold water. The
current carried away the crumbs. He ate the sandwiches
and dipped his hat full of water to drink, the water running
out through his hat just ahead of his drinking.
It was cool in the shade, sitting on the log. He took a
cigarette out and struck a match to light
it. The match sunk
into the grey wood, making a tiny furrow. Nick leaned over
the side of the log, found a hard place and lit the match. He
sat smoking and watching the river.
Ahead the river narrowed and went into a swamp. The
river became smooth and deep and the swamp looked solid
with cedar trees, their trunks close together,
their branches
solid. It would not be possible
to walk through
a swamp like
that. The branches grew so low. You would have to keep
2o8 BIG TWO-HEARTED RIVER: PART II
almost level with the ground to move at all. You could not
crash through the branches. That must be why the animals
that lived in swamps were built the way they were, Nick
thought.
He wished he had brought something
to read. He felt like
reading. He did not feel like going on into tKc swamp. He
looked down the river. A big cedar slanted all the way across
the stream. Beyond that the river went into the swamp.
Nick did not want to go in there now. He felt a reaction
against deep wading with the water deepening up
under his
armpits, to hook big
trout in places impossible
to land them.
In the swamp the banks were bare, the big
cedars came
together overhead, the sun did not come through, except
in
patches; in the fast deep water, in the half light, the fishing
would be tragic. In the swamp fishing was a tragic adventure.
Nick did not want it. He did not want to go down the
stream any farther to-day.
He took out his knife, opened it and stuck it in the log.
Then he pulled up the sack, reached into it and brought out
one of the trout. Holding him near the tail, hard to hold,
alive, in his hand, he whacked him against the log. The
trout quivered, rigid. Nick laid him on the log
in the shade
and broke the neck of the other fish the same way. He laid
them side by side on the log. They were fine trout.
Nick cleaned them, slitting them from the vent to the tip
of the jaw. All the insides and the gills and tongue came out
in one piece. They were both males; long grey-white strips
of milt, smooth and clean. All the insides clean and compact,
coming out all together. Nick tossed the offal ashore for the
minks to find.
He washed the trout in the stream. When he held them
back up in the water they looked like live fish. Their colour
was not gone yet. He washed his hands and dried them on
the log. Then he laid the trout on the sack spread
out on
the log, rolled them up
in it, tied the bundle and put
it in
the landing net. His knife was still standing, blade stuck in
BIG TWO- HEARTED RIVER: PART II 209
the log. He cleaned it on the wood and put it in his pocket.
Nick stood up on the log, holding
his rod, the landing net
hanging heavy, then stepped
into the water and splashed
ashore. He climbed the bank and cut up into the woods>
toward the high ground. He was going back to camp. He
looked back. The river just showed through
the trees. There
were plenty of days coming when he could fish the swamp.
r L'ENVOI
1 he king was working
in the garden. He seemed very glad
to see me.
We walked through the garden. This is the queen, he said. She was
clippingji rose bush. Oh how doyou do, she said. We sat down at a
table under a big tree and the king
ordered whisky and soda. We have
good whisky anyway,
he said. The
rej}olt^na^c^n^njttee,
he told
me, would not allow him to go
outside the palace grounds.
Plastiras
is a very good man I believe, he said, butfrightfully difficult. I think
he did right though shooting
those chaps. If Kerensky had shot afew
men things might have been altogetE^different. Of course the great
thing in this sort of an affair
is not to be shot oneself!
It was very jolly. We talkedfor a long
time. Like all Greeks he
wanted to go to America.
